NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
1
Chapter 53C.
Regulation of Banks.
Article 1.
General Provisions.
§ 53C-1-1.  Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as Regulation of Banks and Other Financial 
Services.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-1-2.  Scope and applicability of Chapter.
(a) 
Unless the context specifies otherwise, this Chapter shall apply to the following:
(1) 
All existing banks organized or created under the laws of this State.
(2) 
All banks created under the provisions of Article 3 of this Chapter.
(3) 
All persons who subject themselves to the provisions of this Chapter.
(4) 
All persons who become subject to the penalties provided for in this Chapter as 
a consequence of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) 
Transactions validly entered into before October 1, 2012, and the rights, duties, and 
interests flowing from them remain valid and may be terminated, completed, or enforced as 
required or permitted by any statute amended or repealed by the law by which this act was enacted 
as though the amendment or repeal had not occurred.
(c) 
Except as restricted by federal law, a federally chartered depository institution that has 
a branch in this State shall have all the rights, powers, and privileges and shall be entitled to the 
same exemptions and immunities as banks organized or created under the laws of this State.
(d) 
Except as restricted by federal law or the laws of another state in which it was organized 
or created, an out-of-state bank that has a branch in this State shall have, with respect to activities 
conducted through such branch, all the rights, powers, and privileges and shall be entitled to the 
same exemptions and immunities as banks organized and created under the laws of this State.
(e) 
Any reference in this Chapter to a state or federal law, regulation, or agency shall be 
deemed to refer to any replacement law or regulation or any successor agency, whether or not this 
Chapter explicitly provides for that reference.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-1-3.  Existing banks; prohibitions, injunctions.
(a) 
No depository institution organized or created under the laws of this State may operate 
as a bank except in accordance with this Chapter. Banks established prior to October 1, 2012, may 
continue operation under their existing organizational documents but shall be subject to all other 
requirements of this Chapter.
(b) 
No person shall operate in this State as a "bank," "savings bank," "savings and loan 
association," "trust company," or otherwise as a depository institution or trust institution unless 
established as a depository institution or trust institution under the laws of this State or another state 
or established under federal law. Unless so authorized, no person doing business in this State shall 
do either of the following:
(1) 
Use in its name the term "bank," "savings and loan," "savings bank," "banking 
company," "trust company," or words of similar meaning that lead the public 
reasonably to believe that it conducts the business of a depository institution or 
trust institution.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
2
(2) 
Use any sign, letterhead, circular, or Web site content or advertise or 
communicate in any manner that would lead the public reasonably to believe 
that it conducts the business of a depository institution or trust institution.
(c) 
Upon application by the Commissioner, a court of competent jurisdiction may issue an 
injunction to restrain any person from violating or from continuing to violate this section.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-1-4.  Definitions and application of terms.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions apply in this Chapter:
(1) 
Acquire. – To obtain the right or power to vote or to direct the voting of voting 
securities of a bank or holding company as follows:
a. 
Through a purchase of or share exchange for shares.
b. 
By reason of an issuance of shares or the exercise of a right under a 
warrant, option, or convertible security or instrument to acquire shares.
c. 
Pursuant to an agreement or trust or through any similar transaction, 
event, or contractual right.
(2) 
Acting in concert. – Knowing participation in a joint activity or interdependent 
conscious parallel action toward the common goal of obtaining control of a 
bank or holding company, whether or not pursuant to an express agreement, 
including participation in a combination or pooling of voting securities of a 
bank holding company for such common purpose pursuant to any contract, 
understanding, relationship, agreement, or other arrangement, whether written 
or otherwise.
(3) 
Affiliate. – A person that, directly or indirectly, controls, is controlled by, or is 
under common control with another person. Each member of a group of persons 
acting in concert shall be deemed an affiliate of the group.
(4) 
Bank. – Any corporation, other than a credit union, savings institution, or trust 
company, that is organized under the laws of this State and is engaged in the 
business of receiving deposits (other than trust funds), paying monies, and 
making loans.
(5) 
Bank operating subsidiary. – A subsidiary that is under the control of a bank and 
engages only in activities in which a bank may engage pursuant to 
G.S. 53C-5-1.
(6) 
Bank premises. – Any improved or unimproved real estate, whether or not open 
to the public, that is utilized or intended to be utilized by a bank, including 
additional space to rent as a source of income.
(7) 
Bank supervisory agency. – Any of the following agencies:
a. 
The CFPB, FDIC, Federal Reserve Board, OCC, and any successor to 
these agencies.
b. 
Any agency of another state with primary responsibility for chartering 
and supervising depository institutions organized under the laws of that 
state.
c. 
Any agency of a sovereign nation with primary responsibility for 
chartering and supervising depository institutions organized under the 
laws of that nation.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
3
(8) 
Bankers' bank. – As defined in Regulation D of the Federal Reserve Board, 12 
C.F.R. § 204.121.
(9) 
Banking laws. – All laws which the Commissioner or the OCOB is authorized 
to enforce under any applicable statute.
(10) 
Board of directors. – A governing board of a company that is responsible for 
policy, oversight, and compliance.
(11) 
Branch. – An office of any bank or a depository institution organized under the 
banking laws of the United States, another state, or another sovereign nation, 
other than that depository institution's principal office, in which deposits are 
received. A branch may also engage in any of the functions or services 
authorized to be engaged in by the bank of which it is a branch. The term 
"branch" does not include a non-branch bank business office, automated teller 
machine, remote deposit facility, remote service unit, customer-bank 
communications terminal, point-of-sale terminal, automated banking facility or 
other direct or remote information processing device or machine, whether 
manned or unmanned, by means of which information relating to any financial 
service or transaction rendered to the public is stored and transmitted, 
instantaneously or otherwise, to or from a bank or other nonbank terminal.
(12) 
Capital. – An amount equal to the bank's "total capital" as that term is used by 
the FDIC in 12 C.F.R. Part 325; provided, that if the term "total capital" is 
replaced by a term including substantially the same elements as "total capital," 
the term "capital" as used in this Chapter shall mean an amount equal to the 
amount calculated by application of the definition of such replacement term.
(13) 
Capital impairment. – The reduction of a bank's capital at any time below its 
required capital.
(14) 
Central reserve bank. – A depository institution of which at least fifty percent 
(50%) of its shares are owned by other depository institutions.
(15) 
CFPB. – The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or its successor.
(16) 
Charter. – A document issued by the Commissioner in accordance with Article 
3 of this Chapter permitting a bank to conduct banking business.
(17) 
Combination. – A merger, share exchange, or transfer or acquisition of all or 
substantially all assets and liabilities of a person undertaken in compliance with 
such federal laws and laws of this State or other states as may be applicable.
(18) 
Commission. – The State Banking Commission provided for in G.S. 53C-2-1.
(19) 
Commissioner. – The Commissioner of Banks provided for in G.S. 53C-2-2.
(20) 
Company. – A corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint 
venture, business trust, trust, syndicate, association, unincorporated 
organization, or other form of business entity.
(20a) Consumer finance licensee. – An individual associated with a "licensee," as that 
term is defined in G.S. 53-165.
(21) 
Control. – The possession, directly or indirectly, of the power or right to direct 
or to cause the direction of the management or policies of a person by reason of 
an agreement, understanding, proxy, or power of attorney or through the 
ownership of or voting power over ten percent (10%) or more of any class of the 
voting securities of the person.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
4
(22) 
Control transaction. – The acquisition of control over a bank or a holding 
company other than pursuant to a combination.
(23) 
Credit union. – A credit union as defined in G.S. 54-109.1.
(24) 
De novo branch. – A branch of a bank or of an out-of-state bank within this State 
that is established as a branch, and not (i) by virtue of an acquisition of the 
existing branch of another bank or out-of-state bank, (ii) by a combination 
involving the bank or out-of-state bank, or (iii) by the conversion of a 
non-branch bank business office to a branch.
(25) 
Deposit. – A "deposit" as defined in Section 3(l) of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1813(l).
(26) 
Deposit insurance. – Insurance of a bank's deposit accounts where the 
beneficiaries are the holders of the insured accounts.
(27) 
Depository institution. – A bank, out-of-state bank, savings institution, or 
federally chartered institution, the deposits of which are insured by the FDIC.
(28) 
Deputy commissioner. – An individual appointed by the Commissioner to such 
office as provided by G.S. 53C-2-3.
(29) 
Distribution. – With respect to a bank, "distribution" has the same meaning as 
set forth in Chapter 55.
(30) 
DPC subsidiary. – A debt previously contracted subsidiary of a bank that 
acquires in good faith an equity ownership interest through foreclosure or other 
realization on collateral, by way of a compromise of a disputed or contested 
claim, or to avoid a loss in connection with a debt previously contracted or to 
which the bank transfers an equity ownership interest so acquired by the bank.
(31) 
Equity ownership interest. – Any beneficial equity or similar interest, whether 
direct or indirect, including shares, limited or general partnership interests, and 
membership interests in a limited liability company.
(32) 
Examination. – A supervisory inspection of a bank, a proposed bank, a holding 
company, or a branch of an out-of-state bank operating in this State that may 
include inspection of all relevant information, including information of or about 
the subsidiaries and affiliates of the bank, proposed bank holding company, or 
branch. "Examination" also includes an investigation of any person with respect 
to any violation or suspected violation of any provision of this Chapter by such 
person, or a review of facts and circumstances relevant to the Commissioner's 
consideration of the issuance of an order pursuant to this Chapter.
(33) 
Farm credit system institution. – A lending institution regulated by the Farm 
Credit Administration.
(34) 
FDIC. – The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or its successor.
(35) 
Federal Reserve Board. – The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System or its successor.
(36) 
Federal savings association. – A federal savings association or federal savings 
bank chartered under Section 5 of the Home Owners' Loan Act, 12 U.S.C. § 
1464.
(37) 
Federally chartered institution. – A national bank or federal savings association.
(38) 
Financial subsidiary. – A "financial subsidiary" as defined in 12 U.S.C. § 
24a(g).


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
5
(39) 
Holding company. – A company that controls a depository institution or that 
controls a company that directly or indirectly controls a depository institution.
(40) 
Immediate family. – An individual's spouse, father, mother, children, brothers, 
sisters, and grandchildren; the father, mother, brothers and sisters of the 
individual's spouse; and the spouse of the individual's child, brother, or sister.
(41) 
Inadequate capital. – An amount of capital equal to at least seventy-five percent 
(75%) but less than one hundred percent (100%) of required capital.
(42) 
Individual. – A human being.
(43) 
Insufficient capital. – An amount of capital less than seventy-five percent (75%) 
of required capital.
(44) 
Lower-tier subsidiary. – Any company which is controlled by a subsidiary.
(45) 
National bank. – A banking association organized under 12 U.S.C. § 21.
(46) 
Non-branch bank business office. – Any staffed physical location open to the 
public, at which any of the following institutions offers one or more banking or 
banking-related products or services, but does not take deposits:
a. 
Bank.
b. 
Out-of-state bank.
c. 
Depository institution established under the laws of another state.
d. 
Federally chartered institution.
e. 
Separately organized subsidiary of a bank, out-of-state bank, depository 
institution established under the laws of another state, or federally 
chartered institution.
f. 
Holding company of a bank, out-of-state bank, depository institution 
established under the laws of another state, or federally chartered 
institution.
The provision of remote deposit capture facilities or services by a non-branch 
bank business office does not constitute a taking of deposits. Non-branch bank 
business offices include loan production offices, mortgage loan offices, and 
insurance agency offices, or a combination thereof.
(47) 
North Carolina financial institution. – A bank, savings institution, or trust 
company organized under the laws of this State. For purposes of the Securities 
Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, any North Carolina 
financial institution is a banking institution.
(48) 
OCC. – The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency or its successor.
(49) 
OCOB. – The Office of the Commissioner of Banks as provided in 
G.S. 53C-2-3.
(50) 
Organizational documents. – The charter, certificate of organization, articles of 
incorporation, articles of association, certificate of limited partnership, bylaws, 
operating agreement, partnership agreement, and any other similar documents 
required to be prepared or adopted by a company in connection with its 
organization, and as thereafter amended from time to time.
(51) 
Organizational law. – The laws of the jurisdiction of organization of a company 
applicable to the organization of the company and its governance, including 
approval of transactions by its board of directors, shareholders, partners, 
members, or beneficiaries, as applicable.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
6
(52) 
Organizers. – One or more individuals who are the organizers of a proposed 
bank responsible for the business of the proposed bank from the filing of the 
application to the Commission's final decision on the application.
(53) 
Out-of-state bank. – A bank that is organized, chartered, or created under the 
laws of a state other than this State and the deposits of which are insured by the 
FDIC.
(54) 
Person. – An individual, a company, or a group of persons who are acting in 
concert.
(55) 
Plan of conversion. – A detailed outline of the procedure of the conversion of a 
depository institution from one to another charter.
(56) 
Practical banker. – An individual who at the time of appointment to the 
Commission is, or has been during the five years preceding the appointment, a 
president, chief executive officer, director, or holder of five percent (5%) or 
more of any class of voting securities of a North Carolina financial institution.
(57) 
Principal office. – The office that houses the headquarters of a bank.
(58) 
Public member. – A member of the Commission who is not a practical banker or 
a consumer finance licensee and who is not at the time of appointment to the 
Commission, nor was within the five years preceding the appointment, an 
employee of a North Carolina financial institution.
(59) 
Public notice. – Notice to the public of the applicable information specified in 
this Chapter by (i) a single publication in a newspaper of general circulation in 
the county in which the bank that is the subject of the publication has its 
principal office or in such other county as may be directed by the Commissioner 
to best meet the purposes for which the notice is required and (ii) a posting in the 
notices section of the Commissioner's Web site for at least 15 days.
(60) 
Record. – Information, reports, memoranda, charts, letters, messages, extracts, 
summaries, analyses, compilations, transaction documentation, account 
statements, financial statements, and other documents, including customer 
financial and other information, whether created, transmitted, distributed, 
retained, or stored in tangible or digital form.
(61) 
Registered agent. – The person named in the organizational documents of a 
company upon whom service of legal process is deemed binding upon the 
company.
(62) 
Required capital. – Required capital means either of the following:
a. 
In the case of a proposed bank, the amount of capital required by the 
Commissioner as a prerequisite to the commencement of the business of 
banking.
b. 
In all other cases, an amount of capital equal to at least the amount of 
capital required for a bank to be deemed "adequately capitalized" under 
applicable federal regulatory capital standards.
(63) 
Savings institution. – A savings and loan association or a savings bank 
organized under the laws of this State or of another state, or a federal savings 
association or savings bank.
(64) 
Shareholder. – Any person in whose name shares are registered in the records of 
a corporation, or the beneficial owner of shares to the extent of the rights 
granted by a nominee certificate on file with a corporation.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
7
(65) 
Shares. – The units into which the equity ownership interests of a corporation 
are divided.
(66) 
State. – Any state of the United States, the District of Columbia, or any territory 
of the United States other than this State.
(67) 
State trust company. – A company organized under the provisions of Article 24 
of Chapter 53 of the General Statutes and a trust company previously organized 
under other provisions of this Chapter to operate only as a trust company and 
not as a commercial bank.
(68) 
Subsidiary. – A company over which a bank has control, including a lower-tier 
subsidiary.
(69) 
This State. – The State of North Carolina.
(70) 
Trust business. – Acting as a fiduciary or in other capacities permissible for a 
trust institution under G.S. 53-331.
(71) 
Trust company. – A trust institution that is neither a depository institution nor a 
foreign bank, as defined in 12 U.S.C. § 1813(s)(1), but not including a bank 
organized under the laws of a territory of the United States.
(72) 
Trust funds. – Trust funds as defined in Section 3(p) of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1813(p).
(73) 
Trust institution. – Any company lawfully acting as a fiduciary in a state or in a 
foreign country.
(74) 
Voting securities. – A security that (i) confers upon the holder the right to vote 
for the election of members of the board of directors or similar governing body 
of the company or (ii) is convertible into, or entitles the holder to receive upon 
its exercise, a security that confers such a right to vote.
(75) 
Well-capitalized. – The term "well-capitalized" has the same meaning as 
defined in Regulation Y of the Federal Reserve Board, 12 C.F.R. § 225.2(r).
(76) 
Well-managed. – Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a company or 
depository institution is well-managed if the following apply:
a. 
At its most recent examination, the company or institution received at 
least a satisfactory composite rating and at least a satisfactory rating for 
management, if such rating is given.
b. 
In the case of a company or depository institution that has not received 
an inspection or examination rating, a company or depository institution 
is well-managed if the Commissioner has determined, after a review of 
the managerial and other resources of the company or depository 
institution and after consulting with any other appropriate bank 
supervisory agency for the company or institution, that the company or 
institution is well-managed.
A depository institution that results from the merger of two or more depository 
institutions that are well-managed shall be considered to be well-managed 
unless the Commissioner determines otherwise after consulting with any other 
appropriate bank supervisory agency for each depository institution involved in 
the merger. A depository institution that results from the merger of a depository 
institution that is well-managed with one or more depository institutions that are 
not well-managed or have not been examined shall be considered to be 
well-managed if the Commissioner determines, after a review of the managerial 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
8
and other resources of the resulting depository institution and after consulting 
with any other appropriate bank supervisory agency for the institutions 
involved in the merger, as applicable, that the resulting institution is 
well-managed.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 1; 2017-165, ss. 1, 2; 2023-61, s. 2.)
§ 53C-1-5.  Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter is found by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as 
to any person or circumstance, or to be preempted by federal law, the remaining provisions of this 
Chapter shall not be affected and shall continue to apply to any other person or circumstance.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 2.
Commission and Commissioner.
§ 53C-2-1.  The Commission.
(a) 
The Commission consists of 15 members, including the State Treasurer, who shall 
serve as an ex officio member; 12 members appointed by the Governor; and two members 
appointed by the General Assembly under G.S. 120-121, one of whom shall be appointed upon the 
recommendation of the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and one of whom shall be appointed 
upon the recommendation of the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Governor shall 
appoint to the Commission three practical bankers, one consumer finance licensee, one member 
who is, or is employed by a person that is, licensed under Article 19B of Chapter 53 of the General 
Statutes, and seven public members. The member appointed upon the recommendation of the 
President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall be a practical banker, and the member appointed upon 
the recommendation of the Speaker of the House shall be a practical banker. Members shall serve 
terms of four years. No individual shall serve more than two complete consecutive terms on the 
Commission. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by the 
appropriate appointing officer for the unexpired term, except that vacancies among members 
appointed by the General Assembly shall be filled in accordance with G.S. 120-122. The appointed 
members of the Commission shall receive subsistence and travel expenses at the rates set forth in 
G.S. 120-3.1. This compensation shall be paid from the revenues of the OCOB.
(b) 
The Commission shall meet at such times, but not less than once every three months, as 
the Commission may by resolution prescribe, and the Commission shall be convened in special 
session at the call of the Governor or the Commissioner. The State Treasurer shall be chair of the 
Commission. The Commission shall meet in person, provided that it may, so long as consistent 
with applicable law regarding public meetings, meet by telephone or video conference, including 
attendance of one or more members by telephone or video conferencing.
(c) 
Except as required by State or federal law, no member of the Commission shall divulge 
or make use of any information designated by this Chapter or by the Commissioner as confidential, 
and no member shall give out any such information unless the information shall be required of the 
member at a hearing at which the member is duly subpoenaed or by a court of competent 
jurisdiction.
(d) 
A quorum of the Commission shall consist of a majority of its total membership. 
Subject to the standards of Chapter 138A of the General Statutes, a majority vote of the members 
qualified with respect to a matter who are present at the meeting where such matter is considered 
shall constitute valid action of the Commission. In accordance with G.S. 138A-38(a)(6), the State 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
9
Treasurer and all disqualified members who are present at a meeting shall be counted for purposes 
of determining whether a quorum is present.
(e) 
The Commission is authorized to supervise, direct, and review the exercise by the 
Commissioner of all powers, duties, and functions vested in or exercised by the Commissioner 
under the banking laws of this State.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 2; 2017-6, s. 3; 2018-146, ss. 
3.1(a), (b), 6.1; 2019-173, s. 3(a).)
§ 53C-2-2.  The Commissioner.
(a) 
Effective April 1, 2011, and quadrennially thereafter, the Governor shall appoint a 
Commissioner, which appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the General Assembly by 
joint resolution. The name of the individual appointed to be Commissioner shall be submitted to 
the General Assembly on or before February 1 of the year in which the individual's term of office 
begins. The term of office for the Commissioner shall be four years. In case of a vacancy in the 
office of Commissioner, the Governor shall appoint an individual to serve as Commissioner on an 
interim basis pending confirmation of a nominee by the General Assembly.
(b) 
The Commissioner has the powers enumerated in this Chapter and otherwise provided 
by North Carolina law and such other powers as may be necessary for the proper discharge of the 
Commissioner's duties, including the power to enter into contracts. The Commissioner shall act as 
the executive officer of the Commission.
(c) 
The Commissioner is authorized to subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance, 
require the production of evidence, administer oaths, and examine any person under oath in 
connection with any subject related to any power vested or duty imposed on the Commissioner 
under this Chapter.
(d) 
The Commissioner may sue and prosecute or defend in any action or proceeding in any 
courts of this State or any other state and in any court of the United States for the enforcement or 
protection of any right or pursuit of any remedy necessary or proper in connection with the subjects 
committed to the Commissioner for administration or in connection with any bank or the rights, 
liabilities, property, or assets thereof under the Commissioner's supervision. Nothing herein shall 
be construed to render the Commissioner liable to be sued except as other departments and 
agencies of the State may be liable under the general law. The Commissioner may exercise any 
jurisdiction, supervise, regulate, examine, or enforce any banking law and any State consumer 
protection laws or federal laws with respect to which the Commissioner has enforcement 
jurisdiction.
(e) 
The Commissioner shall have a seal of office bearing the legend "State of North 
Carolina – Commissioner of Banks." The Commissioner may adopt other symbols or marks of 
office.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 3.)
§ 53C-2-3.  The Office of the Commissioner of Banks.
(a) 
The Commissioner shall be assisted in the performance of the duties of office by (i) one 
or more deputy commissioners and (ii) examiners, investigators, counsel, and other employees 
under the supervision of the Commissioner, all of whom, together with the Commissioner, shall 
comprise the "Office of the Commissioner of Banks." In addition, the work of the OCOB may be 
conducted by employees of other agencies of government and by agents and independent 
contractors of the OCOB. The Commissioner may appoint or remove at his or her discretion any 
deputy commissioner.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
10
(b) 
The Commissioner shall appoint, with the approval of the Governor, and may remove at 
the Commissioner's discretion, a chief deputy commissioner. The chief deputy commissioner may 
perform such duties and exercise such powers of the Commissioner as the Commissioner may 
direct. In the event of the absence, death, resignation, disability, or disqualification of the 
Commissioner, or in case the office of Commissioner otherwise becomes vacant, the chief deputy 
commissioner shall perform the duties and exercise all the powers vested in the Commissioner 
until the Governor appoints an acting Commissioner.
(c) 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the OCOB and its employees are exempt 
from the classification and compensation rules established by the State Human Resources 
Commission pursuant to G.S. 126-4(1) through (4); G.S. 126-4(5) only as it applies to hours and 
days of work, vacation, and sick leave; G.S. 126-4(6) only as it applies to promotion and transfer; 
G.S. 126-4(10) only as it applies to the prohibition of the establishment of incentive pay programs; 
and Article 2 of Chapter 126 of the General Statutes, except for G.S. 126-7.1. The salary of the 
Commissioner shall be fixed by the General Assembly.
(d) 
The Attorney General shall assign an attorney from the Department of Justice to work 
full time with the Commission. The attorney shall be subject to all provisions of Chapter 126 of the 
General Statutes relating to the State Human Resources system. The Commission shall fully 
reimburse the Department of Justice for the compensation, secretarial support, equipment, 
supplies, records, and other property to support the attorney.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-382, s. 9.1(c); 
2014-115, s. 55.4(c).)
§ 53C-2-4.  Administration of the Office of the Commissioner of Banks.
(a) 
As authorized in Chapters 54B, 54C, and this Chapter, the OCOB shall be funded by 
annual or periodic assessments, licensing fees and charges, and reimbursements for examination 
costs. This list is not exclusive. The OCOB may not levy assessments, fees, or other charges except 
as expressly provided in this Chapter or by rule adopted in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter 150B of the General Statutes and the provisions of this section. The Commissioner is 
authorized, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, to establish the time, place, and method for the 
payment of assessments, fees, charges, and costs.
(b) 
Not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the OCOB shall 
prepare and submit to the Commission a budget for the upcoming fiscal year, including the 
estimated revenues and expenses for the year. The Commission shall review the budget in a 
meeting prior to the commencement of the fiscal year with respect to which the budget has been 
presented and shall approve or modify the budget at the meeting.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-2-5.  Rule making.
(a) 
The Commissioner, subject to review and approval by the Commission, may make all 
necessary rules with respect to the establishment, operation, conduct, and termination of any and 
all activities and businesses that are subject to licensing, regulation, supervision, or examination by 
the Commissioner under this Chapter.
(b) 
The rule-making authority conferred on the Commissioner by this section shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of any specific rule-making authority by any other provision of 
this Chapter or otherwise provided by North Carolina law.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-2-6.  Hearings and appeals.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
11
(a) 
Any administrative hearing required or permitted to be held by the Commissioner shall 
be conducted in accordance with Article 3A of Chapter 150B of the General Statutes.
(b) 
Upon an appeal to the Commission by any party from an order entered by the 
Commissioner following an administrative hearing pursuant to Article 3A of Chapter 150B of the 
General Statutes, the chair of the Commission may appoint an appellate review panel of not fewer 
than three members to review the record on appeal, hear oral arguments, and make a recommended 
decision to the Commission. Unless another time period for appeals is provided by this Chapter, 
any party to an order by the Commissioner may, within 20 days after the order and upon written 
notice to the Commissioner, appeal the Commissioner's order to the Commission for review. The 
notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal and set forth in numbered order the 
assignments of error for review by the Commission. Failure to state the grounds for the appeal and 
assignments of error shall constitute grounds to dismiss the appeal. Failure to comply with the 
briefing schedule provided by the Commission shall also constitute grounds to dismiss the appeal. 
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Commissioner shall, within 30 days of the notice, certify to 
the Commission the record on appeal. Any party to a proceeding before the Commission may, 
within 20 days after final order of the Commission, petition the Superior Court of Wake County for 
judicial review of a final determination of any question of law that may be involved. The petition 
for judicial review shall be entitled "(insert name) Petitioner v. State of North Carolina on Relation 
of the Commission." A copy of the petition for judicial review shall be served upon the 
Commissioner pursuant to G.S. 150B-46. The petition shall be placed on the civil issue docket of 
the court and shall have precedence over other civil actions. Within 15 days of service of the 
petition for judicial review, the Commissioner shall certify the record to the Clerk of Superior 
Court of Wake County. The standard of review of a petition for judicial review of a final order of 
the Commission shall be as provided in G.S. 150B-51(b).
(c) 
The hearing officer at administrative hearings conducted under the authority of the 
Commissioner may be the Commissioner, a deputy commissioner, or other suitable person 
designated by the Commissioner to serve as a hearing officer.
(d) 
The Commission may conduct public hearings on matters within its purview.  (2012-56, 
s. 4.)
§ 53C-2-7.  Official record.
(a) 
The Commissioner shall keep a record in the OCOB of the Commissioner's official 
acts, rulings, and transactions that, except as otherwise provided, shall be open to inspection and 
copying by any person. The Commissioner may condition the provision of copies of records upon 
the payment by the person requesting the documents of an amount sufficient to cover the cost of 
retrieving, copying, and if requested, mailing the documents.
(b) 
Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, the following records in the custody of the 
OCOB are confidential and shall not be disclosed or be subject to discovery or public inspection:
(1) 
Records compiled during or in connection with an examination, audit, or 
investigation of any person, including records relating to any application for 
licensure or otherwise to the conduct of business. The OCOB may treat as 
confidential any response to an application.
(2) 
Records containing information compiled in preparation for or anticipation of 
or in the course of litigation, examination, audit, or investigation or containing 
information that was privileged prior to being obtained by the Commissioner.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
12
(3) 
Records containing personal information about a person, whether in paper, 
electronic, or other form, that is maintained by or on behalf of the financial 
institution; provided, however, that every report made by a North Carolina 
financial institution, with respect to a transaction between it and an officer, 
director, or affiliate thereof, which report is required to be filed with the 
Commissioner pursuant to this Chapter, shall be filed with the Commissioner in 
a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall be open to inspection and 
copying by any person.
(4) 
Records containing information furnished in connection with an application 
bearing on the character, competency, or experience, or information about the 
personal finances of an existing or proposed organizer, officer, director, or 
employee of a depository institution, federally chartered institution, trust 
institution, holding company, or any other person subject to the Commissioner's 
jurisdiction.
(5) 
Records containing information about the character, competency, experience, 
or finances of the directors, officers, or other persons having control over a 
person giving notice or filing an application to engage in a control transaction 
pursuant to this Chapter.
(6) 
Records containing information about the character, competency, or experience 
of the directors, executive officers, or other persons having control over any of 
the parties to a combination subject to the Commissioner's jurisdiction.
(7) 
Records of North Carolina financial institutions in dissolution that have 
liquidated, that are under the Commissioner's supervisory control, or that are in 
receivership and that contain the names or other personal information of any 
person.
(8) 
Minutes or other records that have been obtained by the Commissioner and that 
are related to meetings of, or have been prepared by, any of the following bodies 
of a North Carolina financial institution:
a. 
The board of directors.
b. 
A compliance review committee of the board of directors.
c. 
Any other committee of the board of directors.
d. 
A committee established at the direction of the board of directors.
e. 
A committee established at the direction of a committee of the board of 
directors.
(9) 
Records prepared during or as a result of an examination or investigation of any 
person by an agency of the United States, or jointly by the agency and the 
Commissioner, if the records would be confidential under federal law or 
regulation.
(10) 
Records prepared during or as a result of an examination or investigation of any 
person by a regulatory agency with jurisdiction of a state other than this State or 
of a foreign country if the records would be confidential under that jurisdiction's 
law or regulations.
(11) 
Records of information and reports submitted to federal regulatory agencies by 
any depository institution or trust institution, or its affiliates, holding company 
or its subsidiaries, or any other person subject to the Commissioner's 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
13
jurisdiction, if the records would be confidential under federal law or 
regulation.
(12) 
Records of complaints from the public received by the OCOB.
(12a) Records that are confidential under Chapter 132 of the General Statutes or 
protected from disclosure under other applicable law.
(13) 
Any record that would disclose any information set forth in any of the 
confidential records referred to in this subsection.
(c) 
For purposes of this section, "any person subject to the Commissioner's jurisdiction" 
includes any person who is licensed or registered or should be licensed or registered under this 
Chapter.
(d) 
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the Commissioner 
may, by written agreement with any state or federal law enforcement or regulatory agency, share 
with that agency any confidential record set out in subsection (b) of this section or any information 
contained therein, on the condition that such record or information shared shall be treated as 
confidential under the applicable laws and regulations governing the recipient agency.
(e) 
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section which limit discovery 
of confidential records held by the Commissioner, such records may be produced for discovery in a 
criminal or enforcement proceeding if both of the following occur:
(1) 
After reviewing the discovery request, the court orders the Commissioner to 
submit the confidential records to the court for in camera review and the court 
finds that the interests of justice require that the documents be discoverable or 
admissible in evidence.
(2) 
After making the finding provided by subdivision (1) of this subsection, the 
court enters a protective order restricting access and public distribution or any 
republication of the confidential materials requested.
(f) 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a bank, upon approval of the Commissioner, from 
disclosing to an insurance carrier, for the purpose of obtaining insurance coverage required by this 
Chapter, the bank's regulatory rating prepared by the OCOB; provided, however, that the insurance 
carrier must agree in writing to maintain the confidentiality of the information and not to disclose it 
in any manner whatsoever.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2017-165, s. 3.)
Article 3.
Organization of a Bank.
§ 53C-3-1.  Application to organize a bank.
(a) 
An applicant for permission to organize a bank and for a charter must file an application 
with the Commissioner. The application shall be in the form required by the Commissioner and 
shall contain such information as the Commissioner requires, set forth in sufficient detail to enable 
the Commissioner to evaluate the applicant's satisfaction of the criteria set forth in G.S. 53C-3-4. 
The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as provided by rule at the time of filing the 
application.
(b) 
Upon receipt of an application, the Commissioner shall conduct an examination of the 
applicant and any other matters deemed relevant by the Commissioner. The Commissioner may 
require additional information and may require the amendment of the application in the course of 
the examination. An applicant's failure to furnish all required information or to pay the required fee 
within 30 days after filing the application may be considered an abandonment of the application.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
14
§ 53C-3-2.  Permission to organize a bank.
(a) 
With the approval of the Commissioner, the organizers may file articles of 
incorporation for the proposed bank with the Secretary of State. The Commissioner shall authorize 
the organization of the proposed bank if the Commissioner is satisfied that each of the following 
conditions is met:
(1) 
The application is complete.
(2) 
The Commissioner's examination as provided for in G.S. 53C-3-1 indicates that 
the requirements for the issuance of a charter to the applicant are reasonably 
probable of satisfaction.
(3) 
The proposed name of the proposed bank is not likely to mislead the public as to 
its character or purpose and is not the same as a name already adopted by an 
existing depository institution or trust institution operating in this State.
(b) 
If the Commissioner approves the organization of the proposed bank, the 
Commissioner shall issue a certificate to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State shall 
transmit to the Commissioner a certified copy of the filed articles of incorporation of the proposed 
bank.
(c) 
Unless and until the Commissioner issues a charter to the proposed bank:
(1) 
The proposed bank shall not transact any business except such as is incidental 
and necessary to its organization or the application for a charter or preparation 
for commencing the business of banking.
(2) 
All funds paid for shares of the proposed bank shall be placed in escrow under a 
written escrow with a third-party escrow agent satisfactory to the 
Commissioner.
(3) 
All funds for shares placed into escrow, and all dividends or interest on such 
funds, may be removed from escrow only with the Commissioner's approval 
except to the extent that such funds are refunded to subscribers or as otherwise 
required by law.
(d) 
A proposed bank is subject to the jurisdiction of the Commissioner.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-3-3.  Articles of incorporation of a proposed bank.
(a) 
The articles of incorporation of a proposed bank shall be signed and acknowledged by 
or on behalf of an organizer and shall contain the following:
(1) 
The information required to be set forth in articles of incorporation under 
Chapter 55 of the General Statutes.
(2) 
Any provision consistent with Chapter 55 of the General Statutes and other 
applicable law that the organizers elect to set forth for the regulation of the 
internal affairs of the proposed bank and that the Commissioner authorizes or 
requires.
(3) 
Any provision the Commissioner requires or authorizes as a substitute for a 
provision that otherwise would be required by Chapter 55 of the General 
Statutes.
(b) 
Before the chartering of a proposed bank, the articles of incorporation filed under the 
provisions of G.S. 53C-3-2 shall be sufficient certification to the FDIC that the proposed bank is a 
legal entity.  (2012-56, s. 4.)


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
15
§ 53C-3-4.  Commissioner's approval of charter issuance.
(a) 
The Commissioner may approve a charter for a proposed bank only when the 
Commissioner has determined that all the following requirements have been satisfied or are 
reasonably probable to be satisfied within a reasonable period of time specified by the 
Commissioner in the order of approval:
(1) 
The proposed bank has solicited or will solicit subscriptions for purchases of 
shares sufficient to provide an amount of required capital satisfactory to the 
Commissioner for the commencement of the business of banking.
(2) 
All prior public solicitations for purchases of shares and all future solicitations 
will be solicited with appropriate disclosure, taking into account all the 
circumstances of the public solicitation, including a prominent statement in any 
solicitation document to the effect that the solicitation has not been approved by 
the Commissioner or the Commission and that a representation to the contrary 
is a criminal offense.
(3) 
All payments for purchases of shares in a bank in organization are made in 
United States currency.
(4) 
The proposed bank has an operational expense fund from which to pay 
organizational expenses, in an amount determined by the Commissioner to be 
sufficient for the safe and sound operation of the proposed bank while the 
charter application is pending.
(5) 
The proposed bank has been formed for legitimate and lawful business 
purposes.
(6) 
The character, competence, and experience of the organizers, proposed 
directors, proposed officers, and initial holders of more than ten percent (10%) 
of the voting securities of the proposed bank will command the confidence of 
the public.
(7) 
The proposed officers and directors, as a group, have degrees of character, 
competence, and experience sufficient to justify a belief that the proposed bank 
will be free from improper or unlawful influence and otherwise will operate 
safely, soundly, and in compliance with law.
(8) 
The anticipated volume and nature of business of the proposed bank projected 
in the application are reasonable and indicate a reasonable probability of safe, 
sound, and profitable operation of the proposed bank.
(9) 
If the proposed bank intends to conduct "trust business," as defined by G.S. 
53C-1-4(70), it appears that trust powers should be granted based on 
consideration of the various factors set forth in Article 24 of Chapter 53 of the 
General Statutes for considering applications and setting capital for a State trust 
company.
(b) 
The Commissioner's determination that the requirements described in subsection (a) 
are reasonably probable of satisfaction may be based on partial satisfaction of the requirements at a 
level set by the Commissioner as a prerequisite for approval of the charter, and also may be based 
on presentation of a plan for the full satisfaction of the requirements.
(c) 
If it appears to the Commissioner that the proposed bank has satisfied or is reasonably 
probable to satisfy the requirements for issuance of a charter, the Commissioner shall issue an 
order approving the application for a charter and such order shall be submitted to the Commission 
for its review at a public hearing. The Commissioner may, in the order approving the proposed 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
16
bank's charter, impose other reasonable conditions or restrictions upon the proposed bank or the 
new bank, consistent with this Chapter.
(d) 
If it appears to the Commissioner that the proposed bank has not satisfied and is not 
reasonably probable of satisfying the requirements for issuance of a charter, the Commissioner 
shall issue an order denying approval of the application. The applicant may, within 10 days of 
issuance of the order, give notice of appeal of this decision to the Commission pursuant to G.S. 
53C-2-6.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-3-5.  Notice; public hearing.
(a) 
Not less than 30 days before the public hearing of the Commission to review the 
Commissioner's approval of an application, the applicant shall cause to be published a public 
notice containing the following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The name of the community where the proposed bank intends to locate its 
principal office.
(3) 
A statement that a public hearing will be held to review the Commissioner's 
approval of the application.
(4) 
A statement that any interested person may file a written statement either 
favoring or protesting the chartering of the proposed bank. The statement shall 
note that, in order to be considered at the public hearing, all written statements 
from interested persons must be filed with the Commission within 30 days of 
the date of publication of the public notice.
(b) 
At the public hearing, the Commission shall consider the findings and order of the 
Commissioner and shall hear such testimony as the Commissioner may wish to give or be called 
upon to give. To the extent that the Commission deems the information and testimony relevant to 
its review of the Commissioner's order, the Commission shall receive information and hear 
testimony from the organizers and shall hear from any other interested persons.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-3-6.  Commission decision.
(a) 
The Commission shall consider the findings and order of the Commissioner, oral 
testimony, and any other information and evidence, either written or oral, that comes before it at the 
public hearing to review the Commissioner's approval of an application for a charter. The 
Commission may adjourn and reconvene the public hearing in unusual circumstances. The 
Commission shall affirm or reverse the Commissioner's order. The Commission may adopt the 
Commissioner's recommendation with respect to conditions for issuance of a charter, or it may 
modify the conditions recommended by the Commissioner. The Commission shall render its 
decision at the public hearing, unless unusual circumstances require postponement of the decision. 
The Commission's review shall be limited to a determination of whether the criteria set forth in 
G.S. 53C-3-4 have been met and whether the provisions of this Article have been followed.
(b) 
If the Commission denies an application for a charter or if the Commission approves an 
application with conditions not set forth in the Commissioner's approval, the applicant may appeal 
the denial or approval containing such conditions, as provided in G.S. 53C-2-6.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-3-7.  Issuance of charter.
(a) 
A proposed bank shall not engage in business except as allowed under G.S. 
53C-3-2(c)(1), until it receives a charter issued by the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall not 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
17
issue the charter until the Commissioner is satisfied that the proposed bank has done each of the 
following:
(1) 
Received payment in United States currency for the purchase of shares and will 
have satisfactory required capital upon commencing business, in each case in at 
least the amount required by the Commission's order approving the application.
(2) 
Elected the proposed officers and directors named in the application or other 
officers and directors approved by the Commissioner.
(3) 
Secured deposit insurance from the FDIC.
(4) 
Complied with all requirements of the Commission's order approving the 
application for a charter.
(5) 
Appears to be ready to commence the business of banking in the reasonable 
discretion of the Commissioner upon a pre-opening examination.
(b) 
The charter issued by the Commissioner shall set forth any trust powers of the bank that 
may be full or partial trust powers.
(c) 
If a bank does not open and engage in the business of banking within six months after 
the date its charter is issued or within such longer period as may be permitted by the Commissioner, 
the Commissioner shall revoke the charter.
(d) 
If the Commissioner determines that a charter should not be issued following 
Commission approval, the applicant may appeal that decision to the Commission as provided in 
G.S. 53C-2-6.
(e) 
Following the exhaustion of all appeals, the Commissioner may dissolve and liquidate 
the proposed bank as provided in G.S. 53C-9-301, or order the organizers to dissolve and liquidate 
the proposed bank pursuant to G.S. 53C-9-201, if any one of the following occurs:
(1) 
The Commissioner does not recommend the issuance of a charter.
(2) 
The Commission denies approval of a charter.
(3) 
The charter is revoked by the Commissioner pursuant to subsection (c) of this 
section or other applicable law.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 4.
Governance of Banks.
§ 53C-4-1.  Banks – Form of organization.
(a) 
A bank shall be formed as, and shall maintain the form of, a corporation formed under 
the laws of this State.
(b) 
The provisions contained in Chapter 55 of the General Statutes shall apply to banks, 
except where provisions of this Chapter provide differently or where the Commissioner determines 
that any provision of Chapter 55 is inconsistent with the business of banking or the safety and 
soundness of banks.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-2.  Banks controlled by boards of directors.
(a) 
The corporate powers of a bank shall be exercised by or under the authority of, and the 
business and affairs of the bank shall be managed by or under the direction of, its board of 
directors.
(b) 
A bank's board of directors shall consist of not fewer than five individuals. For good 
cause shown, the Commissioner may approve boards of directors consisting of fewer than five 
individuals to the extent consistent with other applicable law.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
18
(c) 
The board of directors shall meet at least quarterly, provided that the executive 
committee shall meet in any month in which there is no meeting of the board of directors, and the 
loan committee shall meet monthly.
(d) 
Except to the extent the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable federal or state 
laws and regulations impose a different standard, bank directors shall have the duties, authority, 
and liabilities of directors of corporations organized under Chapter 55 of the General Statutes.
(e) 
The board of directors of a bank may appoint directors with respect to such of the bank's 
branches as it deems useful to the business of the bank. No such advisory director shall be liable for 
acts or omissions undertaken as an advisory director under the laws applicable to the performance 
of the duties of a director of a bank, unless and only to the extent he or she undertakes or is 
delegated authority as a director of the bank.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-3.  Committees of boards of directors.
(a) 
The board of directors shall appoint, at a minimum, an audit committee, an executive 
committee, and a loan committee (which may be the executive committee or the board of directors 
as a whole) and may appoint such other committees as it deems appropriate to provide for the safe 
and sound operation of the bank in a manner consistent with applicable laws and regulations.
(b) 
The Commissioner may require the board of directors of a bank to establish one or more 
additional committees if, in the judgment of the Commissioner, such committees are reasonably 
necessary or appropriate for good corporate governance, for the safe and sound operation of the 
bank, or to ensure the bank's compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In the exercise of his 
or her judgment under this subsection, the Commissioner may consider, among other factors, the 
asset size of the bank, the range and complexity of the activities in which the bank is engaged, the 
various risks undertaken by the bank, the experience and abilities of the bank's directors and 
officers, and the adequacy of the bank's existing policies, procedures, and internal controls.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-4.  Minutes of meetings of directors and committees.
Minutes shall be recorded and retained for all meetings of the board of directors and board 
committees and kept on file at the bank. The minutes shall show a record of actions taken.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-5.  Qualifications of bank directors.
(a) 
At least three-fourths of the directors of a bank shall be citizens of the United States of 
America.
(b) 
A director must satisfy eligibility requirements for bank directors imposed by federal 
law, including Section 19 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 12 U.S.C. § 1829(a).
(c) 
Following a director's election or appointment as a director, the director shall, solely for 
purposes of any action or proceeding that may thereafter be brought by the Commissioner, and on a 
form satisfactory to the Commissioner, do all of the following:
(1) 
Consent to the jurisdiction of the Commissioner and the General Court of 
Justice for the State of North Carolina in any such action or proceeding.
(2) 
Consent to venue in Wake County, North Carolina, in any such action or 
proceeding.
(3) 
Unless the director appoints an agent pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, 
appoint the Commissioner as the director's agent for service of process in any 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
19
such action or proceeding and authorize and instruct the Commissioner or the 
Commissioner's duly appointed deputy or agent to accept service of process for 
the director in any such action or proceeding.
(d) 
When service of legal process in an action or proceeding brought by the Commissioner 
is made on a director by service and acceptance of service of process in the manner provided in 
subdivision (3) of subsection (c) of this section, the Commissioner shall, within three business days 
thereafter, give notice to the director of such service and acceptance of service of process by 
depositing a copy of the process served and accepted, together with any pleading, order, or other 
item accompanying the process, with a "designated delivery service" as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 
7502(f)(2) and directed to the director's last known address in the Commissioner's records. The 
Commissioner shall keep a record which shall show the day and hour of such acceptance of service 
of process, any pleading, order, or other item accompanying the process, and the date upon which 
the above notice was given. When service of process is made pursuant to subdivision (3) of 
subsection (c) of this section, the time within which the director may file a responsive pleading or 
similar response, as provided by Chapter 1A or Chapter 150B of the General Statutes, shall be 
extended by 12 days.
(e) 
The consent and appointment described in subsections (c) and (f) of this section shall be 
deemed irrevocable and shall not be affected by the termination of the director's service as a 
director.
(f) 
In lieu of meeting the requirements of subdivision (3) of subsection (c) of this section, a 
director may appoint an agent for service of such process in Wake County, North Carolina.  
(2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-6.  Liability of directors.
(a) 
The standard of conduct for directors shall be as set forth in G.S. 55-8-30.
(b) 
Any director of any bank who shall knowingly violate, or who shall knowingly permit 
to be violated by any officers, agents, or employees of the bank, any of the provisions of this 
Chapter shall be held personally and individually liable for all damages which the bank, its 
shareholders, or any other person shall have sustained in consequence of such violation. Any 
aggrieved shareholder of any bank in liquidation may prosecute an action for the enforcement of 
the provisions of this section. Only one such action may be brought.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-7.  Directors may declare distributions.
Provided a bank does not make distributions that reduce its capital below its applicable 
required capital, the board of directors of a bank may declare such distributions as it deems proper.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-8.  Officers and employees shall give bond.
(a) 
A bank shall require security in the form of a bond for the fidelity and faithful 
performance of duties by its officers and employees. The bond shall be issued by a bonding 
company authorized to do business in this State and upon such form as may be approved by the 
Commissioner. Otherwise, the amount, form, and terms of the bond shall be such as the board of 
directors may require. The premium for the bond is to be paid by the bank.
(b) 
To provide for the safety and soundness of a bank, the Commissioner may require an 
increase in the amount of the bond or additional or different security.  (2012-56, s. 4.)


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
20
§ 53C-4-9.  Affiliate transactions.
A bank may extend credit to, and engage in transactions with, its affiliates, directors, executive 
officers, principal shareholders, and their respective immediate family members only to the extent 
permitted by, and subject to such restrictions and conditions as are imposed by, applicable State 
and federal laws and regulations.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-10.  Examination of board composition, structure, and conduct.
(a) 
As part of its examinations of a bank, the OCOB may assess the competence, 
composition, structure, and conduct of such bank's board of directors, including the following:
(1) 
The number of directors.
(2) 
The independence of directors.
(3) 
The committee structure of the board.
(4) 
The education and training of board members.
(5) 
Compliance with the bank's code of ethics.
(b) 
In making the assessment authorized by subsection (a) of this section, the OCOB shall 
take into consideration publicly issued regulations and guidance of the Commissioner and the 
bank's primary federal supervisor and may consider, among other factors, the asset size of the bank, 
the range and complexity of the activities in which the bank is engaged, the various risks 
undertaken by the bank, the experience and abilities of the bank's directors and officers, and the 
adequacy of the bank's existing policies, procedures, and internal controls.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-11.  Reserve fund.
(a) 
Each bank shall maintain a reserve fund as follows:
(1) 
If the bank is a member of the Federal Reserve System, it shall maintain a 
reserve fund in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Reserve Board.
(2) 
All other banks shall maintain a reserve fund as required by the Commissioner.
(b) 
The Commissioner may require a level of reserve fund for nonmember banks as 
provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, taking into consideration the level of liquidity the 
Commissioner deems necessary for the safe and sound operation of the banks.
(c) 
In establishing the required level of reserve fund, the Commissioner shall include the 
following types of liquid reserves:
(1) 
Cash on hand, which shall include both United States currency and exchange of 
any clearinghouse association or similar intermediary, and balances maintained 
at any federal reserve bank, either directly or on a pass-through basis, to meet 
federal reserve system reserve requirements.
(2) 
Balances payable on demand from designated depository institutions.
(3) 
Obligations of the United States Treasury, any agency of the United States 
government that is guaranteed by the United States government, and any 
general obligation of this State or any political subdivision thereof that has an 
investment grade rating of A or higher by a nationally recognized rating service.
(d) 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in the event the reserve fund of a 
bank falls below the level required under subsection (b) of this section, the Commissioner may 
require the bank to do the following:
(1) 
Discontinue making any new extension of credit.
(2) 
Promptly restore its reserve fund to the applicable required level.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
21
(e) 
In the event a bank shall fail to promptly restore its reserve fund to the applicable level 
required within 10 days after the Commissioner directs it to do so, the Commissioner may take 
such actions under Article 8 of this Chapter as the Commissioner deems necessary.  (2012-56, s. 4; 
2013-29, s. 5.)
§ 53C-4-12.  Compliance review committee.
(a) 
For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
(1) 
"Compliance review committee" means (i) a bank's board of directors, (ii) a 
committee authorized by the bank's board of directors, or (iii) any other 
committee or person to the extent the committee or person acts at the direction 
of or reports to the bank's board of directors or a committee authorized by the 
bank's board of directors when any part of the functions of the board, 
committee, or person is to audit, evaluate, report, or determine compliance with 
any of the following standards or requirements:
a. 
Loan underwriting standards.
b. 
Asset quality.
c. 
Financial reporting to federal or State regulatory agencies.
d. 
Adherence to the bank's investment, lending, accounting, ethical, or risk 
assessment, and financial standards.
e. 
Compliance with federal or State statutory or regulatory requirements.
f. 
Cybersecurity requirements.
(2) 
"Compliance review documents" means documents prepared for or created by a 
compliance review committee.
(3) 
"Government agency" means a state or federal regulatory body that is not a 
bank supervisory agency that has jurisdiction over a bank's compliance with 
state or federal laws or regulations, including those dealing with taxes, 
securities, or financial reporting.
(4) 
"Loan review committee" means a person or group of persons who, on behalf of 
a bank, reviews assets, including loans held by the bank, for the purpose of 
assessing the credit quality of the loans or the loan application process, 
compliance with the bank's investment and loan policies, and compliance with 
applicable law and regulations.
(b) 
Banks shall maintain complete records of compliance review documents, and the 
documents shall be available for examination by the Commissioner or any bank supervisory 
agency or government agency having jurisdiction. Notwithstanding Chapter 132 of the General 
Statutes or any other provision of the General Statutes, compliance review documents in the 
custody of a bank, the Commissioner, a government agency, or a bank supervisory agency are 
confidential, are not open for public inspection, and are not discoverable or admissible in evidence 
in a civil action against a bank, its directors, officers, or employees, unless the court finds that the 
interests of justice require that the documents be discoverable or admissible in evidence.  (2012-56, 
s. 4; 2017-165, s. 4.)
§ 53C-4-13.  Immediate report of changes in directors and certain officers.
Each bank shall report to the Commissioner any changes in its (i) directors, (ii) president, (iii) 
chief executive officer, (iv) chief financial officer, (v) chief loan officer, or (vi) chief credit officer 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
22
by the close of the second day on which the bank is open for business following such change.  
(2013-29, s. 6.)
Article 5.
Powers of Banks.
§ 53C-5-1.  Powers.
(a) 
Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Chapter, a bank shall have the powers 
conferred upon business corporations organized under the laws of this State. In addition, and not by 
way of limitation, a bank shall have the power to do the following:
(1) 
Carry on the business of banking, which includes such activities as discounting 
and negotiating promissory notes, drafts, bills of exchange, and other evidences 
of indebtedness; receiving deposits; issuing, advising, and confirming letters of 
credit; receiving money for transmission; and loaning money on personal 
security or on real or personal property.
(2) 
Make any loan that could be made by a federally chartered institution doing 
business in this State.
(3) 
Purchase or invest in loans, or a participating interest in loans, of a type that the 
bank could itself make.
(4) 
Sell any loan, including one or more participating interests in a loan.
(5) 
Make any investments authorized by G.S. 53C-5-2 or any other section of this 
Chapter.
(6) 
Through information technology systems, processes, and capabilities, provide, 
deliver, or otherwise make available banking services and products, enhance the 
effectiveness or efficiency of its operations, and provide other benefits to its 
customers. Additionally, a bank may utilize its information technology systems, 
processes, capabilities, and capacities in the same manner and to the same 
extent as is permitted for national banks.
(7) 
Engage in any other activities approved by rule, order, or interpretation of the 
Commissioner.
(b) 
A bank shall also have the power to engage in any of the following activities:
(1) 
As principal in any activity permissible for a national bank under any law, 
including the National Bank Act, 12 U.S.C. § 24, as well as any activity 
recognized as permissible for a national bank in any regulation, order, or written 
interpretation issued by the OCC.
(2) 
As principal in any activity that is permissible or determined by the FDIC to be 
permissible for a bank under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, 12 U.S.C. § 
1831a, or in any regulation, order, or written interpretation thereunder.
(3) 
As principal in any activity that is permissible for a savings institution 
organized under Chapters 54B or 54C of the General Statutes, or that is 
permissible for a federal savings association under the Home Owners' Loan Act 
of 1933, 12 U.S.C. § 1464, or in any regulation, order, or written interpretation 
thereunder.
(4) 
In any activity other than as principal.
(c) 
In addition to the other powers described in this section, a bank shall have the power to 
exercise all other powers that are reasonably necessary or incident to the exercise of the powers 
authorized in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
23
(d) 
Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, a bank that proposes to engage in 
any new activity shall apply to the Commissioner for approval to engage in the activity before its 
commencement. If the new activity will be conducted in a new or existing subsidiary in which the 
bank intends to make an investment, the bank shall apply to the Commissioner for approval to 
engage in the new activity before entering into the investment. The bank shall not engage in the 
new activity or make the investment unless and until the Commissioner issues a written approval of 
the application. An application for approval shall contain a description of the proposed activity and 
any other information required by the Commissioner. A copy of any notice or application the bank 
is required to file with any bank supervisory agency with respect to the proposed activity shall also 
be provided to the Commissioner. For the purpose of this section, a "new activity" is any business 
activity in which the bank is not currently engaged. The extension or relocation of an existing 
activity into a new department, division, or subsidiary of the bank shall not be considered a new 
activity. A bank may appeal a denial of an application by the Commissioner pursuant to 
G.S. 53C-2-6.
(e) 
No application for approval to engage in a new activity shall be required, provided all of 
the following conditions are met as of the date the activity is commenced:
(1) 
The new activity is one described in subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section.
(2) 
The bank is well-capitalized and well-managed as demonstrated by the 
supervisory rating it received during its most recent safety and soundness 
examination.
(3) 
No notice or application to engage in the new activity is required to be filed by 
the bank with any federal banking regulator.
(f) 
A bank permitted to commence a new activity without prior application and approval 
pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall notify the Commissioner in writing of the 
commencement of the new activity no later than the 30th day after the earlier of (i) commencing 
the new activity or (ii) if applicable, making an investment in a subsidiary through which the new 
activity will be conducted.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 7; 2017-165, s. 5.)
§ 53C-5-2.  Investment authority.
(a) 
In addition to any powers or investments authorized by any other section of this 
Chapter, a bank may invest in the following:
(1) 
The shares or other securities of the following:
a. 
Any other depository institution.
b. 
Any industrial bank, bankers' bank, or other deposit-taking entity 
chartered or existing under any federal or State law, including the shares 
or other securities of clearing corporations defined in G.S. 25-8-102, the 
shares or other securities of central reserve banks, and the shares of an 
Edge Act bank. The investment of any bank in the shares of a central 
reserve bank or bank organized under the Edge Act, 12 U.S.C. § 611, et 
seq., shall at no time exceed ten percent (10%) of the required capital of 
the bank making the investment.
c. 
Any company in which a federally chartered institution is authorized to 
invest under any statute or any regulation, official circular, bulletin, 
order, or written interpretation issued by the OCC.
(2) 
Bonds or notes issued by or fully and unconditionally guaranteed as to principal 
and interest by the United States Treasury. No bank shall be required to 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
24
maintain a reserve against deposits secured by United States Treasury bonds or 
notes equal in market value to the amount of such deposits, and such bonds or 
notes shall be valid security for all loans and deposits to the same extent as are 
any obligations of the United States.
(3) 
Federal farm loan bonds, notes, or similar obligations issued by a farm credit 
system institution.
(4) 
Securities issued by federal home loan banks pursuant to the Federal Home 
Loan Bank Act of 1932, as amended.
(5) 
Bonds or notes secured by a mortgage or deed of trust insured or guaranteed by 
the Federal Housing Administration, Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development, or the Veterans Administration, or in mortgages or deeds of trust 
on real estate that have been accepted for insurance or guarantee by the Federal 
Housing Administration, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or 
Veterans Administration, or in obligations of a national mortgage association, 
which obligations are insured or guaranteed by the United States government. 
No law of this State prescribing the nature, amount, or form of security or 
requiring security upon which loans or investments may be made, or 
prescribing the rates or time of payment of the interest any obligation may bear, 
or prescribing the period for which loans or investments may be made, shall 
apply to investments made pursuant to this subsection.
(6) 
Mutual funds, but subject to rules or orders adopted by the Commissioner.
(b) 
A bank may make an investment in a subsidiary that will be operated as any of the 
following:
(1) 
Bank operating subsidiary.
(2) 
Financial subsidiary.
(3) 
DPC subsidiary, as defined by G.S. 53C-1-4(30).
(c) 
No investment shall be made by a bank or a subsidiary pursuant to subsection (b) or (d) 
of this section unless the following apply:
(1) 
The investment is approved by the board of directors of the bank or a 
board-authorized committee.
(2) 
The bank has carefully investigated the business or activity in which the 
subsidiary established by the investment will engage.
(3) 
The bank has established the risk management and financial controls necessary 
to engage in the business or activity in a safe and sound manner.
(4) 
The bank has, and following the making of the investment and the application 
of the provisions of this subsection, will continue to satisfy the capital 
requirements of this Chapter.
(d) 
A subsidiary may invest in a lower-tier subsidiary, subject to the same requirements and 
limitations applicable to a bank's investment in a subsidiary.
(e) 
Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, a bank or subsidiary proposing to 
make an investment described in subsection (b) or (d) of this section shall give prior written notice 
to the Commissioner, providing such detail as the Commissioner may require. Unless the 
Commissioner, within 30 days following receipt of the notice, notifies the bank or subsidiary that 
the Commissioner objects to the proposed investment, the bank or subsidiary may complete the 
investment. However, the Commissioner may extend the period within which to object to the 
proposed investment if the Commissioner determines that it raises issues that require additional 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
25
information or additional time for analysis. While the objection period is so extended, the bank or 
subsidiary may not proceed with respect to the proposed investment. A bank may appeal an 
objection by the Commissioner pursuant to G.S. 53C-2-6.
(f) 
The prior notice requirement provided by subsection (e) of this section shall not apply if 
all of the following apply:
(1) 
The bank is well-capitalized and well-managed as demonstrated by the 
supervisory rating it received during its most recent examination.
(2) 
Each activity of the subsidiary in which the investment is to be made is either of 
the following:
a. 
One in which the bank is then engaged or has previously been engaged, 
directly or through a different subsidiary, and for which all necessary 
approvals of bank supervisory agencies and of the Commissioner have 
previously been obtained and remain in effect.
b. 
One for which no prior notice or application for approval to any federal 
bank supervisory authority is required.
(3) 
A bank that makes an investment pursuant to the exception created by this 
subsection shall nevertheless notify the Commissioner in writing of the 
investment within 30 days thereafter.
(g) 
Any bank, out-of-state bank, national bank, or any subsidiary thereof that engages in an 
activity subject to licensure and/or regulation under the laws of this State, other than this Chapter, 
shall be subject to licensure and/or regulation on a basis that does not arbitrarily discriminate by the 
appropriate regulatory agency which licenses and/or regulates nonbanks that engage in the same 
activity.
(h) 
The Commissioner shall monitor the impact of investment activities of banks and their 
subsidiaries under this section on the safety and soundness of such banks. Any securities owned or 
hereafter acquired in excess of the limitations herein imposed shall be disposed of at public or 
private sale within six months after the date of acquiring the securities and, if not so disposed of, 
they shall be charged to profit and loss account and no longer carried on the books as an asset. The 
limit of time in which securities shall be disposed of or charged off the books of the bank may be 
extended by the Commissioner if in the Commissioner's judgment it is for the best interest of the 
bank that the extension be granted, provided that the limitations imposed in this section on the 
ownership of shares or other equity ownership interest in companies are suspended only to the 
extent that any bank operating under the supervision of the Commissioner may subscribe for and 
purchase shares and other equity ownership interests in, or debentures, bonds, or other types of 
securities of, any company organized under the laws of the United States for the purposes of 
insuring the depositors a part or all of their funds on deposit in banks to the extent as security 
ownership is required in order to obtain the benefits of deposit insurance for such depositors.
(i) 
A bank may purchase, hold, and convey real estate other than bank premises for the 
following purposes:
(1) 
As security for extensions of credit made or moneys due to it when that real 
estate has been mortgaged to it in good faith.
(2) 
When the real estate has been purchased at sales upon foreclosures of 
mortgages and deeds of trust held or owned by it, or on judgments or decrees 
obtained and rendered for debts due to it, or through deeds in lieu of foreclosure 
or other settlements affecting security of those debts. All real property acquired 
under this subdivision shall be sold by the bank within five years after it is 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
26
acquired unless, upon application by the bank, the Commissioner extends the 
time within which the sale shall be made.
(j) 
A bank's investment in any bonds or other debt obligations of any one person, other 
than obligations of the United States government or an agency thereof, or other obligations 
guaranteed by the United States, this State, another state, or other political subdivision of this State 
or another state, shall at no time exceed ten percent (10%) of the sum of (i) the bank's "capital," as 
that term is defined in G.S. 53C-1-4, plus (ii) those portions of the bank's allowance for loan and 
lease losses, deferred tax assets, and intangible assets that are excluded from the bank's capital 
under 12 C.F.R. Part 325.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 8.)
§ 53C-5-3.  Banks, fiduciaries authorized to invest in securities approved by the Secretary of 
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Housing Administration, Veterans 
Administration.
(a) 
Insured Mortgages and Obligation of National Mortgage Associations and Federal 
Home Loan Banks. – It shall be lawful for all commercial and industrial banks, trust companies, 
building and loan associations, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, mortgagees 
and loan correspondents approved by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or Federal 
Housing Administration, and other financial institutions engaged in business in this State, and for 
guardians, executors, administrators, trustees, or others acting in a fiduciary capacity in this State 
to invest, to the same extent that such funds may be invested in interest-bearing obligations of the 
United States, their funds or moneys in their custody or possession that are eligible for investment, 
in bonds or notes secured by a mortgage or deed of trust insured or guaranteed by the Federal 
Housing Administration, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or the Veterans 
Administration, or in mortgages or deeds of trust on real estate which have been accepted for 
insurance or guarantee by the Federal Housing Administration, Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development, or Veterans Administration, and in obligations of a national mortgage association, 
which obligations are insured or guaranteed by the United States Government, or bonds, 
debentures, consolidated bonds, or other obligations of any federal home loan bank or banks.
(b) 
Insured or Guaranteed Loans; Loans Purchased by National Mortgage Associations 
and Federal Home Loan Banks. — All such banks, trust companies, building and loan associations, 
savings and loan associations, insurance companies, mortgagees and loan correspondents 
approved by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or Federal Housing 
Administration, and other financial institutions, and also all such guardians, executors, 
administrators, trustees, or others acting in a fiduciary capacity in this State, may make such loans, 
secured by real estate, as the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Housing 
Administration, a national mortgage association, or the Veterans Administration has insured or 
guaranteed, or has made a commitment to insure or guarantee, and may obtain such insurance or 
guarantee; provided, further, that the above designated financial institutions may make loans, 
secured by real estate, that are eligible and committed for sale to a national mortgage association, 
federal home loan bank, federal home loan mortgage corporation, or other agency or 
instrumentality of the United States.
(c) 
Eligibility for Credit Insurance. — All banks, trust companies, building and loan 
associations, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, mortgagees and loan 
correspondents approved by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or Federal Housing 
Administration, and other financial institutions, on being approved as eligible for credit insurance 
by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Housing Administration, or the 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
27
Veterans Administration, may make such loans as are insured by the Secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development or Federal Housing Administration or insured or guaranteed by the Veterans 
Administration.
(d) 
Certain Securities Made Eligible for Collaterals. — Whenever by statute of this State 
collateral is required as security for the deposit of public or other funds; or deposits are required to 
be made with any public official or department; or an investment of capital or surplus, or a reserve 
or other fund is required to be maintained, consisting of designated securities, bonds, and notes 
secured by a mortgage or deed of trust insured or guaranteed by the Secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development, Federal Housing Administration, or Veterans Administration, debentures 
issued by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or the Federal Housing 
Administration and obligations of a national mortgage association shall be eligible for such 
purposes.
(e) 
General Laws Not Applicable. — No law of this State prescribing the nature, amount, 
or form of security or requiring security upon which loans or investments may be made, or 
prescribing or limiting the rates or time of payment of the interest any obligation may bear, or 
prescribing or limiting the period for which loans or investments may be made, shall be deemed to 
apply to loans or investments made pursuant to the foregoing paragraphs.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 6.
Bank Operations.
§ 53C-6-1.  Loans and extensions of credit.
(a) 
A bank may make a loan or extension of credit secured by the pledge of its own shares 
or the shares of its holding company, provided:
(1) 
When a bank exercises its security interest in shares of the bank or its holding 
company, it shall dispose of all of the shares within a period of six months. If the 
shares have not been disposed of within six months, the shares shall be charged 
to profit and loss and no longer carried as an asset of the bank. The 
Commissioner may extend the six-month period not to exceed an additional six 
months.
(2) 
A bank may not extend credit to finance the purchase of or to carry shares of the 
bank or the shares of its holding company. For purposes of this subsection, the 
phrase "to carry" has the meaning set forth in 12 C.F.R. Part 221, as 
promulgated by the Federal Reserve Board.
(b) 
Loans and Extensions of Credit – Limitations:
(1) 
The total loans and extensions of credit, both direct and indirect, by a bank to a 
person, other than a municipal corporation for money borrowed, including in 
the liabilities of a company the liabilities of the several members of the 
company, outstanding at one time and not fully secured, as determined in a 
manner consistent with subdivision (2) of this subsection, by collateral having a 
market value at least equal to the amount of the loan or extension of credit, shall 
not exceed the greater of (i) fifteen percent (15%) of the sum of the bank's 
capital plus those portions of the bank's allowance for loan and lease losses, 
deferred tax assets, and intangible assets that are excluded from the bank's 
capital under 12 C.F.R. Part 325 or (ii) the amount permitted for national banks 
in this State by statute or regulation of the Comptroller of the Currency.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
28
(2) 
The total loans and extensions of credit, both direct and indirect, by a bank to a 
person outstanding at one time and fully secured by readily marketable 
collateral having a market value, as determined by reliable and continuously 
available price quotations, at least equal to the amount of the loan or extension 
of credit outstanding, shall not exceed the greater of (i) ten percent (10%) of the 
sum of the bank's capital plus those portions of the bank's allowance for loan 
and lease losses, deferred tax assets, and intangible assets that are excluded 
from the bank's capital under 12 C.F.R. Part 325 or (ii) the amount permitted for 
national banks by statute or regulation of the Comptroller of the Currency. This 
limitation shall be separate from and in addition to the limitation contained in 
subdivision (1) of this subsection.
(3) 
The following shall not be considered as extensions of credit within the 
meaning of this section; provided that the limitations of this subsection shall not 
apply to loans or obligations to the extent that they are secured or covered by 
guarantees or by commitments or agreements to take over or purchase the same 
made by any federal reserve bank or by the United States or any department, 
board, bureau, commission, or establishment of the United States, including any 
corporation wholly owned, directly or indirectly, by the United States:
a. 
The discount of bills of exchange drawn in good faith against actual 
existing values.
b. 
The discount of solvent trade acceptances or other solvent commercial 
or business paper actually owned by the person negotiating the same.
c. 
Loans or extensions of credit secured by a segregated deposit account in 
the lending bank.
d. 
The purchase of bankers' acceptances of the kind described in section 13 
of the Federal Reserve Act and issued by other depository institutions.
e. 
The purchase of any notes and the making of any loans secured by not 
less than a like face amount of bonds of the United States or any agency 
of the United States; or other obligations guaranteed by the United 
States government or the State of North Carolina; or certificates of 
indebtedness of the United States, or agency thereof; or other 
obligations guaranteed by the United States government.
(4) 
For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions and conditions apply:
a. 
"Person" includes an individual or a corporation, partnership, trust, 
association, joint venture, pool, syndicate, sole proprietorship, 
unincorporated organization, or any other form of entity not specifically 
listed; provided, the term "person" shall not include (i) a clearing 
organization registered with the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (or its successor) or the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (or its successor) or any federal banking agency or (ii) a 
bank's affiliates.
b. 
Loans or extensions of credit to one person include loans made to other 
persons when the proceeds of the loans or extensions of credit are to be 
used for the direct benefit of the first person or the persons are engaged 
in a common enterprise.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
29
c. 
For purposes of this section, extensions of credit by a bank to a person 
shall include the bank's credit exposures to the person in derivative 
transactions with the bank.
d. 
"Derivative transaction" includes any transaction that is a contract, 
agreement, swap, warrant, note, or option that is based, in whole or in 
part, on the value of, any interest in, or any quantitative measure or the 
occurrence of any event relating to one or more commodities, securities, 
debt instruments, currencies, interest or other rates, indices, or assets.
e. 
Credit exposure to a person in connection with a derivative transaction 
shall be determined based on an amount that the bank reasonably 
determines, in accordance with customary industry practices under the 
terms of the derivative transaction or otherwise, would be its loss if the 
person were to default on the date of determination, taking into account 
any netting and collateral arrangements and any guarantees or other 
credit enhancements, provided that the bank may elect to determine 
credit exposure on the basis of such other method of determining credit 
exposure as may be permitted by the bank's primary federal regulator.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall monitor the lending activities of banks under this section for 
undue credit concentrations and inadequate risk diversification that could adversely affect the 
safety and soundness of the banks.
(d) 
Rules adopted by the Commissioner to ensure that extensions of credit made by banks 
are in keeping with sound lending practices and to promote the purposes of this Chapter shall not 
prohibit a bank from making any extension of credit that is a permitted extension of credit for a 
federally chartered institution.
(e) 
Any bank may, by resolution duly passed at a meeting of its board of directors or a 
board-authorized committee, request the Commissioner to suspend the limitations on loans set 
forth in this section as the limitations may apply to any particular loan (i) on the bank's books that 
then exceeds such limitations, or (ii) which the bank desires to make or modify in a manner that 
would not otherwise be permitted in the absence of a suspension of such limitations. Upon receipt 
of a duly certified copy of such resolution, the Commissioner may, in the Commissioner's 
discretion and subject to such requirements, limitations, and conditions as the Commissioner 
deems appropriate, suspend the limitations on loans set forth in this section insofar as they apply to 
the loan in question.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, ss. 9, 10.)
§ 53C-6-2.  Deposits.
(a) 
A bank may, consistent with applicable law and safe and sound banking practices, offer 
all types of deposit accounts upon such terms and conditions as the bank considers appropriate.
(b) 
A bank shall secure insurance for its deposits from the FDIC.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-3.  Securing deposits.
(a) 
A bank may not create a lien on its assets or otherwise secure the repayment of a 
deposit, except as authorized or required by this section, other laws of this State, or federal law.
(b) 
A bank may pledge its assets to secure a deposit of the government of this State or any 
other state, any agency or political subdivision of this State or any other state, the United States 
government, any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or any Indian tribe recognized by 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
30
the United States government as eligible for the services provided to Indian tribes by the Secretary 
of the Interior because of its status as an Indian tribe.
(c) 
This section does not prohibit the pledge of assets by a bank to secure the repayment of 
money borrowed.
(d) 
An act, deed, conveyance, pledge, or contract in violation of this section is void.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-4.  Minors.
(a) 
A bank may issue and operate a deposit account in the name of a minor or in the name of 
two or more individuals, one or more of whom are minors, and receive payments, pay withdrawals, 
accept a pledge of the account, issue automated teller machine (ATM) and debit cards, contract for 
overdraft protection, and act in any other manner with respect to the account on the order of the 
minor with like effect as if the minor were of full age and legal capacity. Any payment to or at the 
direction of a minor is a discharge of the bank to the extent thereof. The account shall be held for 
the exclusive right and benefit of the minor and any joint owners, free from the control of all other 
persons except creditors. A minor who obtains a deposit account from a bank under this subsection, 
whether individually or together with others, is bound by the terms of the deposit account 
agreement to the same extent as if the minor were of full age and legal capacity.
(b) 
Any bank may lease a safe deposit box to a minor or to two or more individuals, one or 
more of whom are minors. With respect to any such lease, a bank may deal with the minor in all 
regards as if the minor were of full age and legal capacity. A minor entering a lease agreement with 
a bank under this subsection, whether individually or together with others, is bound by the terms of 
the safe deposit box agreement to the same extent as if the minor were of full age and legal 
capacity.
(c) 
If a minor with a deposit account, other than a joint account with right of survivorship 
or a Payable on Death account, dies, a parent or legal guardian of the minor may access and 
withdraw the funds on deposit, and the bank is discharged to the extent of any withdrawal. If a 
minor with a safe deposit box dies, the provisions of G.S. 28A-15-13 shall control the opening, 
inventory, and release of contents of the safe deposit box.
(d) 
This section shall not affect the law governing transactions with minors in cases outside 
the scope of this section, including transactions that constitute an extension of credit to the minor.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-5:  Reserved for future codification purposes.
§ 53C-6-6.  Joint accounts.
(a) 
Any two or more individuals may establish a joint deposit account by written contract. 
The deposit account shall be held for them as joint tenants. The account also may be held pursuant 
to G.S. 41-2.1 of the General Statutes and have the incidents set forth in that section. If the account 
is held pursuant to G.S. 41-2.1, the contract shall set forth that fact.
(b) 
Unless the individuals establishing a joint account have agreed with the bank that 
withdrawals require more than one signature, payment by the bank to, or at the direction of, any 
joint tenant designated in the contract authorized by this section shall be a total discharge of the 
bank's obligation as to the amount so paid.
(c) 
Funds in a joint account established with right of survivorship shall belong to the 
surviving joint tenant or tenants upon the death of a joint tenant, and the funds shall be subject only 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
31
to the personal representative's right of collection as set forth in G.S. 28A-15-10(a)(3), or as 
provided in G.S. 41-2.1 if the account is established pursuant to the provisions of that section. 
Payment by the bank of funds in the joint account to a surviving joint tenant or tenants shall 
terminate the personal representative's authority under G.S. 28A-15-10(a)(3) to collect against the 
bank for the funds so paid, but the personal representative's authority to collect such funds from the 
surviving joint tenant or tenants is not terminated.
(d) 
A pledge of a joint account by any one or more of the joint tenants, unless otherwise 
specifically agreed between the bank and all joint tenants in writing, shall be a valid pledge and 
transfer of the account or of the amount so pledged, shall be binding upon all joint tenants, shall not 
operate to sever or terminate the joint ownership of all or any part of the account, and shall survive 
the death of any joint tenant.
(e) 
A bank is not liable to joint tenants for complying in good faith with a writ of execution, 
garnishment, attachment, levy, or other legal process that appears to have been issued by a court or 
other authority of competent jurisdiction and seeks funds held in the name of any one or more of 
the joint tenants.
(f) 
Persons establishing a joint account with right of survivorship under this section shall 
sign a statement showing their election of the right of survivorship in the account and containing 
language set forth in a conspicuous manner and substantially similar to the following:
"BANK (or name of institution)
JOINT ACCOUNT WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP
G.S. 53C-6-6
We understand that by establishing a joint account under the provisions of North Carolina 
General Statute 53C-6-6 that:
(1) 
The bank (or name of institution) may pay the money in the account to, or on the 
order of, any person named as a joint holder of the account unless we have 
agreed with the bank that withdrawals require more than one signature; and
(2) 
Upon the death of one joint owner, the money remaining in the account will 
belong to the surviving joint owners and will not pass by inheritance to the heirs 
of the deceased joint owner or be controlled by the deceased joint owner's will.
_______________
_______________"
(g) 
This section does not repeal or modify any provision of law relating to estate taxes.
(h) 
Any joint tenant may terminate a joint account.
(i) 
Where a joint account is held by two or more individuals and a joint tenant does not 
wish for the account to be terminated but requests to be removed from the account, the bank shall 
remove the joint tenant from the account. The joint account shall continue in the names of the 
remaining tenant or tenants. Any joint tenant who requested to be removed from an account 
remains liable for any debts incurred in connection with the joint account during the period in 
which the individual was a named joint tenant.
(j) 
Any joint account created under the provisions of G.S. 53-146.1 as it existed prior to 
October 1, 2012, shall for all purposes be governed by the provisions of this section on and after 
October 1, 2012, and any reference to G.S. 53-146.1 in any document concerning the account shall 
be deemed a reference to this section.
(k) 
This section shall not be deemed exclusive. Deposit accounts not conforming to this 
section shall be governed by other applicable provisions of the General Statutes or the common 
law, as appropriate.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 11.)


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
32
§ 53C-6-7.  Payable on Death accounts.
(a) 
If any individual establishing a deposit account executes a written agreement with the 
bank containing a statement that it is executed pursuant to the provisions of this section and 
providing for the account to be held in the name of the individual as owner for one or more 
beneficiaries, the account and any balance thereof shall be held as a Payable on Death account. The 
account shall have the following incidents:
(1) 
Any owner during the owner's lifetime may change any designated beneficiary 
by a written direction to the bank.
(2) 
If there are two or more owners of a Payable on Death account, the owners shall 
own the account as joint tenants with right of survivorship and, except as 
otherwise provided in this section, the account shall have the incidents set forth 
in G.S. 53C-6-6.
(3) 
Unless the individual establishing the Payable on Death account has agreed 
with the bank that a withdrawal requires more than one signature, payment by 
the bank to, on the order of, or at the direction of any owner is a total discharge 
of the bank's obligation as to the paid amount.
(4) 
If any beneficiary is an individual, there may be one or more beneficiaries, each 
of whom shall be an individual, and the following requirements shall apply:
a. 
If only one beneficiary is living and of legal age at the death of the last 
surviving owner, the beneficiary shall be the owner of the account and 
payment by the bank to the owner shall be a total discharge of the bank's 
obligation as to the amount paid. If two or more beneficiaries are living 
at the death of the last surviving owner, they shall be owners of the 
account as joint tenants with right of survivorship as provided in 
G.S. 53C-6-6, and payment by the bank to the owners or any of the 
owners shall be a total discharge of the bank's obligation as to the 
amount paid.
b. 
If only one beneficiary is living and that beneficiary is not of legal age at 
the death of the last surviving owner, the bank shall transfer the funds in 
the account to the general guardian or guardian of the estate, if any, of 
the minor beneficiary. If no guardian of the minor beneficiary has been 
appointed, the bank shall hold the funds in a similar interest-bearing 
account in the name of the minor until the minor reaches the age of 
majority or until a duly appointed guardian withdraws the funds.
(5) 
If any beneficiary is not an individual, there shall be only one beneficiary.
(6) 
If one or more owners survive the last surviving beneficiary who was a natural 
person, or if a beneficiary who is an entity other than a natural person should 
cease to exist before the death of the owner, the account shall become an 
individual account of the owner, or a joint account with right of survivorship of 
the owners, and shall have the legal incidents of an individual account in a case 
of a single owner or a joint account with right of survivorship, as provided in 
G.S. 53C-6-6, in the case of multiple owners.
(7) 
Prior to the death of the last surviving owner, no beneficiary shall have any 
ownership interest in a Payable on Death account. Funds in a Payable on Death 
account established pursuant to this subsection shall belong to the beneficiary or 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
33
beneficiaries upon the death of the last surviving owner, and the funds shall be 
subject only to the personal representative's right of collection as set forth in 
G.S. 28A-15-10(a)(1). Payment by the bank of funds in the Payable on Death 
account to the beneficiary or beneficiaries shall terminate the personal 
representative's authority under G.S. 28A-15-10(a)(1) to collect against the 
bank for the funds so paid, but the personal representative's authority to collect 
such funds from the beneficiary or beneficiaries is not terminated.
(8) 
A pledge of a Payable on Death account by any owner, unless otherwise 
specifically agreed between the bank and all owners in writing, is a valid pledge 
and transfer of the account or of the pledged amount, is binding upon all owners 
and beneficiaries, does not operate to sever or terminate the joint ownership of 
all or any part of the account, and survives the death of any owner or any 
beneficiary.
The individual establishing an account under this subsection shall sign a statement containing 
language set forth in a conspicuous manner and substantially similar to the following language. 
The following language may be on a signature card or in an explanation of the account that is set 
out in a separate document whose receipt is acknowledged by the individual establishing the 
account:
"BANK (or name of institution)
PAYABLE ON DEATH ACCOUNT
G.S. 53C-6-7
I (or we) understand that by establishing a Payable on Death account under the provisions of 
North Carolina General Statute 53C-6-7 that:
1. 
During my (or our) lifetime I (or we), individually or jointly, may withdraw the 
money in the account.
2. 
By written direction to the bank (or name of institution) I (or we), individually 
or jointly, may change the beneficiary or beneficiaries.
3. 
Upon my (or our) death, the money remaining in the account will belong to the 
beneficiary or beneficiaries, and the money will not be inherited by my (or our) 
heirs or be controlled by will.
_______________"
(b) 
This section shall not be deemed exclusive. Deposit accounts not conforming to this 
section shall be governed by other applicable provisions of the General Statutes or the common 
law, as appropriate.
(c) 
No addition to the accounts, nor any withdrawal, payment, or change of beneficiary, 
shall affect the nature of the account as Payable on Death accounts or affect the right of any owner 
to terminate the account.
(d) 
This section does not repeal or modify any provisions of law relating to estate taxes.
(e) 
Any Payable on Death account created under the provisions of G.S. 53-146.2, as it 
existed prior to October 1, 2012, shall for all purposes be governed by the provisions of this section 
on and after October 1, 2012, and any reference to G.S. 53-146.2 in any document concerning the 
account shall be deemed a reference to this section.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 12; 2017-165, s. 6.)
§ 53C-6-8.  Personal agency accounts.
(a) 
Any person may establish a personal agency account by written contract containing a 
statement that it is executed pursuant to the provisions of this section. A personal agency account 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
34
may be any type of deposit account. The written contract shall name an agent who shall have 
authority to act on behalf of the depositor in the manner set out in this subsection. The agent shall 
have the authority to do the following:
(1) 
Make, sign, or execute checks drawn on the account or otherwise make 
withdrawals from the account.
(2) 
Endorse checks made payable to the principal for deposit only into the account.
(3) 
Deposit cash or negotiable instruments, including instruments endorsed by the 
principal, into the account.
(b) 
A person establishing an account under this section shall sign a statement containing 
language substantially similar to the following in a conspicuous manner:
"BANK (or name of institution)
PERSONAL AGENCY ACCOUNT
G.S. 53C-6-8
The undersigned understands that by establishing a personal agency account under the 
provisions of North Carolina General Statute 53C-6-8, the agent named in the account may:
1. 
Sign checks drawn on the account.
2. 
Make deposits into the account.
The undersigned also understand that if the undersigned is a natural person, upon his or her 
death, the money remaining in the account will be controlled by his or her will or inherited by his or 
her heirs.
_______________"
(c) 
An account created under the provisions of this section grants no ownership right or 
interest in the agent. Upon the death of the principal, there is no right of survivorship to the 
account, and the authority set out in subsection (a) of this section terminates.
(d) 
The written contract referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall provide that the 
principal may elect to extend the authority of the agent set out in subsection (a) of this section to act 
on behalf of the principal in regard to the account, notwithstanding the subsequent incapacity or 
mental incompetence of the principal. If the principal is an individual and elects to extend the 
authority of the agent, then upon the subsequent incapacity or mental incompetence of the 
principal, the agent may continue to exercise the authority, without the requirement of bond or of 
accounting to any court, until the agent receives actual knowledge that the authority has been 
terminated. The duly qualified guardian of the estate of the incapacitated or incompetent principal, 
or the duly appointed attorney-in-fact for the incapacitated or incompetent principal acting 
pursuant to a durable power of attorney, as defined in G.S. 32A-8 [see now G.S. 32C-1-102], 
which grants to the attorney-in-fact the authority in regard to the account that is granted to the agent 
by the written contract executed pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall have the power, 
upon notifying the agent and providing written notice to the bank where the personal agency 
account is established, to terminate the agent's authority to act on behalf of the principal with 
respect to the account. Upon termination of the agent's authority, the agent shall account to the 
guardian or attorney-in-fact for all actions of the agent in regard to the account during the 
incapacity or incompetence of the principal. If the principal is an individual and does not elect to 
extend the authority of the agent, then upon the subsequent incapacity or mental incompetence of 
the principal, the authority of the agent set out in subsection (a) of this section terminates.
(e) 
When an account under this section has been established, all or part of the account or 
any interest or dividend may be paid on a check made, signed, or executed by the agent. In the 
absence of actual knowledge that the principal has died or that the agency created by the account 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
35
has been terminated, the payment shall be valid and sufficient discharge to the bank for payment so 
made.
(f) 
A personal agency account shall have only one owner and one agent. The owner shall 
retain the authority to change the named agent on the personal agency account.
(g) 
Any personal agency account created under the provisions of G.S. 53-146.3, as it 
existed prior to October 1, 2012, shall for all purposes be governed by the provisions of this section 
on and after October 1, 2012, and any reference to G.S. 53-146.3 in any document concerning the 
account shall be deemed a reference to this section.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 13; 2017-165, s. 7.)
§ 53C-6-9.  Accounts opened by adults for minors.
(a) 
One or more adults may open and maintain a custodial deposit account for or in the 
name of a minor and using the minor's taxpayer identification number. Unless otherwise provided 
in the agreement governing the account the following terms apply:
(1) 
Beneficial ownership of the account vests exclusively in the minor. All interest 
credited to the account shall belong to the minor and shall be reported to the 
appropriate taxing authorities in the name of the minor using the minor's 
taxpayer identification number.
(2) 
Except as otherwise provided, control of the account vests exclusively in the 
custodian whose name appears on the bank's records for the account. If there is 
more than one custodian named on the bank's account records, each may act 
independently. Any one or more of the custodians named on the bank's records 
may turn over control of the account to the minor at any time, either before or 
after the minor reaches the age of majority.
(3) 
If the custodian has not already transferred control, then after the minor 
beneficiary reaches the age of majority, the beneficiary may instruct the bank to 
transfer control to the beneficiary and remove the named custodian.
(4) 
If the custodian or, if more than one custodian is on the account, the last of the 
custodians to survive dies before the minor reaches the age of majority, the 
minor's parent or the minor's legal guardian may act as custodian or name 
another custodian on the account.
(b) 
This section shall not be deemed exclusive. Accounts not conforming to this section 
shall be governed by other applicable provisions of the General Statutes, including Chapter 33A, 
the North Carolina Uniform Transfers to Minors Act, or the common law, as appropriate.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-10.  Payment of balance of deceased person or person under disability to personal 
representative or guardian.
(a) 
A bank may pay any balance on deposit to the credit of any deceased individual to the 
duly qualified personal representative, collector, or public administrator of the decedent who is 
qualified as such under the laws of any state.
(b) 
A bank may pay any balance on deposit to the credit of any individual judicially 
declared incompetent or otherwise under a legal disability to the duly qualified personal 
representative, guardian, curator, conservator, or committee of the person declared incompetent or 
under disability who is qualified as such under the laws of any state.
(c) 
The presentation of a letter of qualification as personal representative, collector, public 
administrator, guardian, curator, conservator, or committee of the person issued or certified by the 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
36
appointing court shall be conclusive proof of the jurisdiction of the court issuing the same and 
sufficient authority for the payment.
(d) 
Payment by a bank in good faith under the authority of this section discharges the 
liability of the bank to the extent of the payment.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-11.  Powers of attorney; notice of revocation; payment after notice.
(a) 
Any bank may continue to recognize any act of an attorney-in-fact or other agent until 
the bank receives actual notice of the principal's death or a written notice of revocation signed by 
the principal who granted the authority or, in the case of a company, evidence satisfactory to the 
bank of the revocation. Payment by the bank to or at the direction of an attorney-in-fact or other 
agent before receipt of the notice is a total discharge of the bank's obligation as to the amount so 
paid.
(b) 
Notwithstanding that a bank has received written notice of revocation of the authority 
of an attorney-in-fact or other designated agent, a bank may, until 10 days after receipt of notice, 
pay any item made, drawn, accepted, or endorsed by the attorney-in-fact or agent prior to the 
revocation, provided that the item is otherwise properly payable.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-12.  Account statements to be rendered annually or on request.
(a) 
Every bank shall render an account statement for each deposit account at least annually 
to the depositor; provided, however, the statements are not required for time deposits. Every bank 
shall render a statement of account for each deposit account, including time deposits upon receipt 
of an appropriate request reasonably made by a depositor.
(b) 
For purposes of this section, an account statement is deemed to have been "rendered" to 
a depositor as of the earlier of the date the statement is mailed to the depositor's address as shown 
on bank records and the date the account is posted to the bank's Web site in a manner and a form 
ensuring the statement to be readily available to the depositor; provided however, the bank and the 
depositor may agree that an account statement may be rendered by other means.
(c) 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the depositor from the duty of 
exercising due diligence in the review of an account statement rendered by the bank and of timely 
notification to the bank upon discovery of any error.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-13.  Safe deposit boxes; unpaid rentals; procedure; escheats.
(a) 
If the rental due on a safe deposit box is 90 days or more past due, the lessor bank may 
send a notice by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address 
of the lessee or by another means agreed to in writing by the lessor bank and the lessee, stating that 
the safe deposit box will be opened and its contents stored at the expense of the lessee unless 
payment of the rental is made within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice or the date such 
notice is given by the means otherwise previously agreed to in writing by the lessor bank and the 
lessee. If the rental is not paid within the stated period, the box may be opened in the presence of an 
officer of the bank and of a notary public who is not a director, officer, employee, or shareholder of 
the bank. The contents shall be sealed in a package by the notary public, who shall write on the 
outside the name of the lessee and the date of the opening. The notary public shall execute a 
certificate reciting the name of the lessee, the date of the opening of the box, and a list of its 
contents. The certificate shall be included in the package, and a copy of the certificate shall be sent 
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the lessee 
or by the means otherwise previously agreed to in writing by the lessor bank and the lessee. The 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
37
package then shall be placed in the general vaults of the bank at a rental not exceeding the rental 
previously charged for the box.
(b) 
If the contents of the safe deposit box have not been claimed within two years of the 
mailing or other permissible delivery of the copy of the certificate to the lessee, the bank may send 
a further notice to the last known address of the lessee by registered mail or certified mail, return 
receipt requested, to the last known address of the lessee or by a means otherwise previously 
agreed to in writing by the lessor bank and the lessee, stating that unless the accumulated charges 
are paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the notice, the contents of the box will be 
delivered to the State Treasurer as abandoned property under the provisions of Chapter 116B of the 
General Statutes.
(c) 
The bank shall submit to the State Treasurer a verified inventory of all of the contents of 
the safe deposit box upon delivery of the contents of the box or such part thereof as shall be 
required by the State Treasurer under G.S. 116B-55, but the bank may deduct from any cash of the 
lessee in the safe deposit box an amount equal to accumulated charges for rental and shall submit to 
the State Treasurer a verified statement of the charges and deduction. If there is no cash or 
insufficient cash to pay accumulated charges in the safe deposit box, the bank may submit to the 
State Treasurer a verified statement of accumulated charges or balance of the accumulated charges 
due, and the State Treasurer shall remit to the bank the charges or balance due, up to the value of the 
property in the safe deposit box delivered to the State Treasurer, less any costs or expenses of sale; 
but if the charges or balance due exceeds the value of the property, the State Treasurer shall remit 
only the value of the property, less costs or expenses of sale. Any accumulated charges for safe 
deposit box rental paid by the State Treasurer to the bank shall be deducted from the value of the 
property of the lessee delivered to the State Treasurer.
(d) 
Any property, including documents or writings of a private nature, that has little or no 
apparent financial value need not be sold but may be destroyed by the bank if the State Treasurer 
declines to receive the property under G.S. 116B-69(a).
(e) 
An explanation of the contractual provisions pertaining to default, together with 
reference to this section, shall be printed on every contract for rental of a safe deposit box.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-14.  Reproduction and retention of records; admissibility of copies in evidence; 
disposition of originals; record production generally.
(a) 
Any bank may cause any or all records kept by it to be recorded, copied, or reproduced 
by any photographic, reproduction, electronic, or digital process or method, or by any other records 
retention technology approved by rule or order of the Commissioner, of a kind that is capable of 
accurately converting the records into tangible form within a reasonable time. Each such converted 
tangible form of record also shall be deemed a record.
(b) 
Any tangible form of a record shall be deemed for all purposes to be an original record 
and shall be admissible in evidence in all courts and administrative agencies in this State, if 
otherwise admissible, and the bank may destroy or otherwise dispose of the original form of the 
record; provided, however, that a bank shall retain either the originals or convertible form of its 
records for such period as may be required by law or by rule or order of the Commissioner. Any 
bank may dispose of any original or convertible form of a record that has been retained for the 
period prescribed by law or by rule or order of the Commissioner for its class.
(c) 
Originals and converted tangible forms of records shall not be held inadmissible in any 
court action or proceeding on the grounds that they lack certification, identification, or 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
38
authentication and shall be received as evidence if otherwise admissible in any court or 
quasi-judicial proceeding if they have been identified and authenticated by the live testimony of a 
competent witness or if the records are accompanied by a certificate substantially in the following 
form:
"CERTIFICATE REGARDING BANK RECORDS
1. The accompanying documents are true and correct copies of the records of [name of 
bank]. The records were made in the regular course of business of the bank at or 
near the time of the acts, events, or conditions they reflect.
2. The undersigned is authorized to execute this certificate.
3. This certificate is issued pursuant to G.S. 53C-6-14.
I certify, under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of North Carolina, that the 
foregoing statements are true and correct.
Date: _____________________
__________________________________
Signature
__________________________________
Print or type name
__________________________________
Title
[Notarize as required by law for an affidavit]"
(d) 
This section supplements and does not supersede G.S. 8-45.1.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-15.  Establishment of branches.
(a) 
A bank may establish one or more branches in this State, whether de novo or by 
acquisition of existing branches of another depository institution, with the prior written approval of 
the Commissioner. The Commissioner's approval may be given or withheld, in the Commissioner's 
discretion, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section.
(b) 
A bank may establish branches in another state, whether de novo or by acquisition of 
existing branches of another depository institution, in accordance with the provisions of applicable 
federal law and the laws of the other state, upon prior written approval of the Commissioner. The 
Commissioner's approval may be given or withheld in the Commissioner's discretion in 
accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section.
(c) 
A bank seeking authority to establish a branch shall make application to the 
Commissioner in a form acceptable to the Commissioner. Not more than 30 days before nor less 
than 10 days after the filing of the application with the Commissioner, the applicant shall publish 
public notice of the filing of the application. The public notice shall contain all of the following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The physical address or location of the proposed branch, including street and 
city or town.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
application to the Commissioner and that comments received by the 
Commissioner within 14 days of the date of publication of the public notice 
shall be considered. The public notice shall provide the then current mailing 
address of the Commissioner.
(d) 
A bank may conduct any activities at a branch in another state authorized under this 
section that are permissible for a bank chartered by the other state where the branch is located, 
except to the extent the activities are expressly prohibited by the laws of this State or by any rule or 
order of the Commissioner applicable to the bank.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
39
(e) 
Upon receipt of an application to establish a branch, the Commissioner shall conduct an 
examination of the pertinent facts and information and may request such additional information as 
the Commissioner deems necessary to make a decision on the application. In deciding whether to 
approve a branch application, the Commissioner shall take into account such factors as the 
financial condition and history of the applicant; the adequacy of its capital; the applicant's future 
earnings prospects; the character, competency, and experience of its management; the probable 
impact of the branch on the condition of the applicant bank and existing depository institutions in 
the community to be served; and the convenience and needs of the community the proposed branch 
is to serve.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-16.  Change of location of a branch or principal office.
(a) 
A bank may change the location of its principal office or a branch with the prior written 
approval of the Commissioner. A request to relocate the principal office or a branch of a bank shall 
be made in a form acceptable to the Commissioner and shall include information regarding the 
reason for the proposed relocation, the distance and direction of the move, and such other 
information as the Commissioner may require in order to reach a decision in the matter.
(b) 
Not more than 30 days before nor less than 10 days after filing a request to relocate the 
principal office or a branch of a bank, the applicant shall publish public notice of the request. The 
public notice shall contain all of the following:
(1) 
A statement that the request has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The physical address of the principal office or branch to be relocated and the 
physical address of the proposed new location.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
request to the Commissioner and that comments received by the Commissioner 
within 14 days of the date of publication of the public notice will be considered. 
The statement shall provide the then current mailing address of the 
Commissioner.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall approve a request to relocate the principal office or a branch of 
a bank if the relocation is to a site within the same vicinity as the original location, or does not result 
in a material change in the primary service area of the principal office or branch, or is considered 
important to the economic viability of the bank or the branch, or is otherwise found not to be 
inconsistent with the public need and convenience.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-17.  Branch closings.
A bank may close a branch upon providing written notice to the Commissioner and the 
customers of the branch at least 90 days prior to the proposed closing. The notice shall include the 
date the branch will close and posting, in a conspicuous manner on the branch premises for a period 
of 30 days prior to the proposed closing date, a notice of its intent to close the branch. The 
consolidation of two or more branches into a single location in the same vicinity shall not be 
considered a closure subject to the 90-day and 30-day notice requirements of this section. To be 
considered a consolidation, the bank shall request consolidation treatment from the Commissioner, 
who shall decide, in his or her discretion, whether the branches to be consolidated are considered to 
be in the same vicinity, with due consideration to the distance between the branches and the nature 
of the market in which the branches are situated.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-18.  Non-branch bank business offices.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
40
(a) 
A bank may establish in this State or another state one or more non-branch bank 
business offices as defined by G.S. 53C-1-4(46), subject to the following requirements:
(1) 
If a proposed non-branch bank business office will be used in connection with a 
new activity for which an application is required under G.S. 53C-5-1(d) or an 
investment for which a notice is required under G.S. 53C-5-2(e), that 
application or notice shall include written notification of the intent to open the 
office. The notification shall include the proposed location of the office and a 
description of the business to be conducted at the office. If the Commissioner 
does not request additional information or object to its establishment within 10 
days of the date of receipt of the notification, the non-branch bank business 
office shall be deemed approved. In deciding whether to object to the 
establishment of a non-branch bank business office, the Commissioner shall 
consider, without limitation, whether the business proposed to be conducted at 
the non-branch bank business office is permissible for a bank, the costs of its 
establishment and ongoing operation and the impact of the costs on the bank's 
capital and profitability, and the ability of the bank's management to conduct the 
proposed business.
(2) 
If written notification is not required under subdivision (a)(1) of this section, the 
bank shall provide the Commissioner with written notification of the location of 
the office and a description of the business to be conducted at the office.
(b) 
An out-of-state bank may establish and operate a non-branch bank business office in 
this State upon written notice to the Commissioner.
(c) 
A bank or an out-of-state bank may close a non-branch bank business office at any time 
with notice to the Commissioner.
(d) 
No deposits may be taken at a non-branch bank business office.  (2012-56, s. 4; 
2017-165, s. 8.)
§ 53C-6-19.  Operations; suspension.
(a) 
A bank, any of its branches, and any of its non-branch bank business offices may 
operate on such days and during such hours, and may observe such holidays, as the bank's board of 
directors shall designate.
(b) 
Whenever the Commissioner determines that an emergency exists or is pending in this 
State or any part thereof, the Commissioner may authorize banks operating in the affected area or 
areas to suspend any or all of their operations in such area or areas for such period or periods as the 
Commissioner establishes. An emergency is any condition or occurrence that may interfere with a 
bank's operations or poses an existing or imminent threat to the safety or security of persons or 
property, or both.
(c) 
In the event that an emergency exists or is pending in this State or any part thereof and a 
bank operating in the affected area or areas is unable to communicate the existence or pendency of 
the emergency to the OCOB, an officer of the bank may suspend any or all of the bank's operations 
in the affected area or areas without the prior approval of the Commissioner. The bank shall give 
notice of such closing to the Commissioner as soon as practicable.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-6-20.  Savings promotion raffles.
A bank may offer a savings promotion raffle in which the sole consideration required for a 
chance of winning designated prizes is the deposit of a minimum specified amount of money in a 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
41
savings account or other savings program offered by the bank. A bank shall maintain records 
sufficient to facilitate an audit of the savings promotion raffle, shall conduct the savings promotion 
raffle in a safe and sound manner, and shall fully disclose the terms and conditions of the promotion 
to account holders and prospective account holders of the bank.  (2019-173, s. 2(b).)
Article 7.
Control Transactions; Combinations; Conversions.
Part 1. Change in Control.
§ 53C-7-101.  Control transactions.
(a) 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this section, a person shall not engage in a 
control transaction, as defined by G.S. 53C-1-4(22), involving a bank without the prior approval of 
the Commissioner. A person may contract to engage in a control transaction with the 
consummation of such control transaction being subject to receipt of the approval of the 
Commissioner.
(b) 
The Commissioner may require a person who is obligated to file an application under 
this Part to appoint an agent resident in this State for service of process upon the filing of such 
notice or as a condition to the acceptance of such application for review. The application for 
approval shall be in a form required by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by such fee as 
may be required by rule.
(c) 
The following transactions shall not constitute a control transaction requiring the prior 
approval of the Commissioner:
(1) 
The acquisition of control over voting securities in connection with securing, 
collecting, or satisfying a debt previously contracted for in good faith and not 
for the purpose of acquiring control of the bank, if the acquiring person files a 
notice with the Commissioner, in the form required by the Commissioner, 
describing such transaction at least 10 days before the acquiring person first 
votes or directs the voting of the voting securities.
(2) 
The acquisition of control over voting securities by a person who has previously 
engaged in a control transaction with respect to the bank after receiving the 
approval of the Commissioner under this Article, which approval permits the 
acquisition of control over additional voting securities, or any person who is an 
affiliate of the person previously engaging in the approved control transaction 
with the permission and who is identified in the application submitted for the 
approval, if the acquiring person files a notice with the Commissioner, in the 
form required by the Commissioner, describing the transaction at least 10 days 
before the acquiring person or affiliate thereof first votes or directs the voting of 
the voting securities.
(3) 
An acquisition of control over voting securities by operation of law, will, or 
intestate succession, if the acquiring person files a notice with the 
Commissioner, in the form required by the Commissioner, describing the 
acquisition or transfer at least 10 days before the acquiring person first votes or 
directs the voting of the voting securities.
(4) 
Bona fide gifts.
(5) 
A transaction exempted by rules, orders, or declaratory rulings of the 
Commissioner issued because approval of such a transaction is not necessary to 
achieve the objectives of this Chapter.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
42
(5a) 
An acquisition of control over voting shares exempt from the prior approval 
requirements set forth in section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, as 
amended (12 U.S.C. § 1842), pursuant to the exceptions described in items (A), 
(B), or (C) of subsection (a) of that section.
(6) 
An acquisition of control over voting securities in a transaction subject to 
approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, as amended (12 
U.S.C. § 1842).
(d) 
Upon receipt of a notice described in subsection (c), the Commissioner may, before the 
10th day following the receipt, notify the acquiring person of the Commissioner's objection to the 
exercise of control over the voting securities or may require the acquiring party to submit further 
information before exercising control over the voting securities. An acquiring person receiving a 
notice of objection shall be required to submit an application for approval of a control transaction. 
An acquiring person receiving a notice to submit further information may be required to provide 
any information that would be included in an application for approval of a control transaction. In 
the event such an acquiring person is comprised of a group of persons, the Commissioner may 
require each member of the group to submit relevant information.
(e) 
All voting securities over which control has been acquired by an acquiring person shall 
not be voted on any matter submitted to a vote of the holders of the outstanding voting securities of 
the bank and shall be deemed authorized but unissued for purposes of determining the presence of a 
quorum of holders of voting securities until such time as follows:
(1) 
The Commissioner has approved an application for approval of a control 
transaction with respect to the voting securities.
(2) 
The transaction is one listed in subsection (c) of this section that does not 
require the filing of a notice with the Commissioner.
(3) 
The transaction is one listed in subsection (c) of this section that requires a 
notice to be filed with the Commissioner and the Commissioner has not issued 
an objection to the notice and any requirement of the Commissioner for the 
filing of further information has been determined by the Commissioner to have 
been satisfied.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 14.)
§ 53C-7-102.  Application regarding a control transaction.
(a) 
A person seeking approval of a control transaction involving a bank under this Article 
shall file the following with the Commissioner:
(1) 
An application in the form prescribed by the Commissioner.
(2) 
All filing fees required by a rule of the Commissioner.
(3) 
Such information as is required by a rule of the Commissioner or as is deemed 
by the Commissioner to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
(b) 
In the event a person submitting an application is a group of persons, the Commissioner 
may require each member of the group to submit information relevant to the application.
(c) 
Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, information about the character, competence, 
or experience of an acquiring person or its proposed management personnel or affiliates shall be 
deemed a record of the Commissioner and subject to G.S. 53C-2-7(b).  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 
15.)
§ 53C-7-103.  Public notice.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
43
A person filing an application for approval of a control application shall publish a public notice 
of the filing of the application not more than 30 days before nor more than 10 days after the filing of 
the application with the Commissioner. The public notice shall contain the following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The name of the applicable bank and the address of its principal office.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
proposed control transaction and that comments received by the Commissioner 
within 14 days of the date of the publication of the public notice shall be 
considered. The public notice shall provide the current mailing address of the 
Commissioner.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-104.  Actions on control transaction applications.
(a) 
The Commissioner shall examine the proposed control transaction, including the 
character, competence, and experience of the acquiring person and its proposed management 
personnel, to determine whether the interests of the customers and communities served by the bank 
would be adversely affected by the proposed control transaction. Not later than the 60th day 
following receipt of a completed application for approval of a control transaction, unless 
extraordinary circumstances require a longer period of review, the Commissioner shall approve or 
deny the application.
(b) 
The Commissioner may deny an application for approval of a control transaction for 
any of the following reasons:
(1) 
The financial condition of the person seeking approval of a control transaction 
could jeopardize the financial stability of the bank or the financial interests of its 
customers.
(2) 
An examination of the character, competence, and experience of any acquiring 
person or of any of the proposed management personnel shows that it would not 
be in the interest of the depositors of the bank, or in the interest of the public, to 
permit the person to control the bank.
(3) 
The plans or proposals of the person seeking approval with respect to exercising 
control over the bank would not be in the best interests of the bank's customers.
(4) 
Upon the effective date of such proposed control transaction, the bank would 
not be solvent, have inadequate capital, or not be in compliance with this 
Chapter or rules of the Commissioner.
(5) 
The application for approval is incomplete.
(6) 
If the acquiring person solicits votes for the approval of or consents to the 
control transaction from the holders of the voting securities of the bank, 
adequate and complete disclosures of all material information about the 
proposed control transaction, together with a prominent statement that neither 
the control transaction nor any solicitation of the holders' votes or consents have 
been approved by the Commissioner and that any representation to the contrary 
is a criminal offense, have not been made to the holders.
(c) 
If an application filed under this Part is approved by the Commissioner, the control 
transaction may become effective. All conditions to approval set forth in the order of the 
Commissioner shall be enforceable against the person, and each member of a group of persons, 
receiving the approval.  (2012-56, s. 4.)


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
44
§ 53C-7-105.  Appeal.
Any order of the Commissioner denying an application for approval of a control transaction 
may be appealed to the Commission by the person filing the application denied, as provided in G.S. 
53C-2-6.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Part 2. Combinations.
§ 53C-7-201.  Combination authority.
With the approval of the Commissioner, a bank may combine with one or more depository 
institutions or non-depository institutions, provided that the bank is the surviving entity in any 
combination with a non-depository institution. The application for approval shall be in the form 
required by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by rule.  (2012-56, s. 
4.)
§ 53C-7-202.  Combination application and investigation.
(a) 
A bank seeking approval of a combination shall file with the Commissioner an 
application for approval, copies of the agreement under which the bank proposes to effect the 
combination, and such additional information as the Commissioner shall require by rule or as is 
required by the Commissioner in connection with the application in order to achieve the objectives 
of this Chapter.
(b) 
A bank filing an application for approval of a combination shall publish a public notice 
of the filing of the application not more than 30 days before nor more than 10 days after the filing of 
the application with the Commissioner. The public notice shall contain the following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The names of the parties to the proposed combination and the addresses of their 
principal offices.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
proposed combination and that comments received by the Commissioner within 
14 days of the date of the publication of the public notice shall be considered. 
The public notice shall contain the current mailing address of the 
Commissioner.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall examine the proposed combination, including the character, 
competency, and experience of the proposed directors and executive officers of the surviving party 
of the combination, to determine whether the interests of the customers of and communities served 
by the parties to the combination would be adversely affected by the proposed combination.
(d) 
Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, information about the character, competence, 
or experience of the directors and executive officers of the parties to a combination received by the 
Commissioner shall be subject to G.S. 53C-2-7(b).  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-203.  Decision on application.
Based on the application and the Commissioner's examination, the Commissioner shall enter 
an order approving or denying approval of the proposed combination not later than the 60th day 
following the date the Commissioner notifies the parties that the application is complete, unless 
extraordinary circumstances require a longer period of review.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-204.  Interim banks.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
45
The Commissioner may approve an application to organize an interim bank solely for the 
purpose of effecting a combination under this Article. No interim bank shall transact any business 
except as is incidental and necessary to its organization and the combination. The Commissioner 
may set forth in the order approving the organization such additional conditions with respect to the 
interim bank as the Commissioner deems necessary.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-205.  Fiduciary powers and liabilities in a combination or a transferring of assets and 
liabilities.
Whenever any depository institution or any trust institution shall combine with or shall sell to 
and transfer its assets and liabilities to any other depository institution, trust institution, or other 
company, as provided by the laws of this State or the United States, all the then existing fiduciary 
rights, powers, duties, and liabilities of the combining or transferring institution, including the 
rights, powers, duties, and liabilities as executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, and/or any other 
fiduciary capacity, whether under appointment by order of court, will, deed, or other instrument, 
shall, upon the effective date of the combination or sale and transfer, vest in, devolve upon, and 
thereafter be performed by the surviving or transferee company, and such latter institution shall be 
deemed substituted for and shall have all the rights and powers of the transferring institution.  
(2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 16.)
§ 53C-7-206.  Combination with federally chartered institution.
A combination by a bank with a federally chartered institution in which the federally chartered 
institution will be the surviving party shall be subject to approval by the chartering authority of the 
federally chartered institution in accordance with the laws of the United States.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-207.  Combination with a nonbank subsidiary.
(a) 
Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a bank proposing to do any of the 
following combinations shall give prior written notice to the Commissioner that provides the 
details of the proposed combination that are required by the Commissioner:
(1) 
Combine with a nonbank subsidiary, if the bank is the resulting entity of the 
combination.
(2) 
Combine a nonbank subsidiary with another company that is not a depository 
institution, if the nonbank subsidiary is the resulting entity.
(3) 
Combine two or more nonbank subsidiaries of two or more banks under 
common control of the same holding company.
Unless the Commissioner, within 30 days of receiving the notice, notifies the bank or 
subsidiary that the Commissioner objects to the proposed combination, the bank or subsidiary may 
complete the combination. However, the Commissioner may extend the period to object to the 
proposed combination if the Commissioner determines that it raises issues that require additional 
information or additional time for analysis. While the objection period is so extended, the bank or 
subsidiary may not proceed with respect to the proposed combination.
(b) 
A bank may, pursuant to G.S. 53C-2-6, appeal an objection by the Commissioner.
(c) 
The prior written notice requirement of subsection (a) of this section is not required (i) 
for a combination of a nonbank subsidiary and another company that is not a depository institution, 
provided the nonbank subsidiary is not the resulting entity, (ii) for a combination of two or more 
nonbank subsidiaries of the same bank, each of which shall be effected in accordance with 
applicable organizational law, or (iii) if all of the following apply:


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
46
(1) 
The bank is well-capitalized and well-managed as demonstrated by the 
supervisory rating it received during its most recent examination.
(2) 
The nonbank subsidiary with which the combination is to be made engages in 
either of the following activities:
a. 
One in which the bank is then engaged or has previously been engaged, 
directly or through a different subsidiary, and for which all necessary 
approvals of bank supervisory agencies and of the Commissioner have 
previously been obtained and remain in effect.
b. 
One for which no prior notice or application for approval to any federal 
bank supervisory authority is required.
(3) 
The bank notifies the Commissioner in writing of the combination within 30 
days thereafter.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 17; 2017-165, s. 9.)
§ 53C-7-208: Repealed by Session Laws 2013-29, s. 18, effective April 16, 2013.
§ 53C-7-209.  Appeal.
Any order of the Commissioner denying an application for approval of a combination may be 
appealed to the Commission by a party to the combination as provided in G.S. 53C-2-6.  (2012-56, 
s. 4.)
Part 3. Charter Conversion.
§ 53C-7-301.  Conversion to a North Carolina bank charter.
(a) 
Any depository institution that is not a bank may apply to the Commissioner for 
permission to convert into a bank and for certification of related amendments to its organizational 
documents necessary to effect the conversion. The application for approval shall be in the form 
required by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by rule.
(b) 
A plan of conversion shall be submitted as a part of the application filed with the 
Commissioner. The Commissioner may require amendment of the plan.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall approve the plan of conversion, as amended if applicable, if 
upon examination the Commissioner finds the following:
(1) 
The resulting bank will commence operations in a safe, sound, and prudent 
manner with adequate capital, liquidity, reserves, asset composition, and 
earnings prospects.
(2) 
The directors and officers of the converting institution are qualified by 
character, competency, and experience to control and operate the resulting bank 
in a legal and proper manner.
(3) 
The interests of the converting institution's customers, creditors, and 
shareholders will not be materially and adversely affected by the proposed 
conversion.
(4) 
The plan of conversion is not in violation of the converting institution's 
applicable organizational law.
(5) 
Adequate written disclosure of the material terms of the plan of conversion and 
other relevant material information has been or will be made to the converting 
institution's equity ownership interest holders as required by the converting 
institution's organizational law, including a statement in any such written 
disclosure that any materials used to solicit the votes of the holders have not 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
47
been approved by the Commission or the Commissioner and that any 
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
(d) 
Following approval of the plan of conversion, the Commissioner shall supervise and 
monitor the conversion process in order to determine compliance by the converting institution with 
the plan of conversion and applicable law.
(e) 
The Commissioner shall authorize by order the consummation of the conversion, issue 
a charter, and permit the converting institution to file with the Secretary of State and other public 
officials such documents as are necessary to effect the conversion when the Commissioner 
determines the conversion process complied with the organizational law applicable to the 
converting institution and the plan of conversion was approved, if required by applicable 
organizational law, by such vote of the converting institution's equity ownership interest holders as 
is required under the organizational law.
(f) 
The Commissioner may provide in the order authorizing the consummation of 
conversion for the resulting bank to do the following:
(1) 
Wind up any activities legally engaged in by the converting institution at the 
time of conversion but not permitted to banks.
(2) 
Return any assets and deposit liabilities legally held by the converting 
institution at the time of the conversion but not permitted to be held by banks.
The length, terms, and conditions of the transitional periods described in this subsection shall 
be subject to the discretion of the Commissioner.
(g) 
Upon the effective date of the conversion, the converting institution shall continue in 
existence as a bank, and all rights, liabilities, and obligations of whatever kind of the converting 
institution shall continue and remain in its new form of organization. Except as may be authorized 
by the Commissioner pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, the bank shall have only those 
rights, powers, and duties authorized for or imposed upon banks by the laws of this State and the 
United States. All actions and proceedings to which the converting institution was party prior to 
conversion shall be unaffected by the conversion and shall proceed as if the conversion had not 
been effected.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-302.  Appeal.
Any order of the Commissioner denying an application for approval of a conversion to a bank 
may be appealed to the Commission by the party filing the application as provided in G.S. 53C-2-6.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-7-303.  Conversion by North Carolina bank.
(a) 
A bank may convert to another form of depository institution under the laws of this 
State, of another state, or the United States in accordance with applicable law.
(b) 
Upon the effective date of the conversion, the depository institution shall notify the 
Commissioner of the effective date and file with the Commissioner a copy of its authorization to 
operate as a depository institution certified by the applicable federal regulator or financial 
institution regulator.
(c) 
Upon the effective date of the conversion, the resulting depository institution shall 
cease to be a bank.
(d) 
Upon the effective date of the conversion, all rights, liabilities, and obligations of 
whatever kind of the bank shall continue and remain in its new form of organization as a depository 
institution organized under the laws of this State, another state, or the United States. All actions and 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
48
proceedings to which the bank was party prior to conversion shall be unaffected by the conversion 
and shall proceed as if the conversion had not been effected.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 8.
Bank Supervision.
§ 53C-8-1.  Commissioner has authority to supervise banks.
(a) 
Every bank shall be under the supervision of the Commissioner. It shall be the 
Commissioner's duty to enforce the banking laws through the employees and agents of the OCOB. 
All banks shall conduct their business in a manner consistent with the banking laws.
(b) 
The Commissioner may enter into written agreements, cease and desist order 
stipulations, cease and desist orders, consent orders, and similar arrangements with banks and their 
holding companies, or either of them; may request resolutions be approved by boards of directors 
of banks and their holding companies, or either of them; and may take other similar corrective 
actions.
(c) 
Upon written request, the Commissioner may, notwithstanding any other provision of 
law to the contrary, issue letters of interpretation, advisory opinions, or written guidance on any 
laws under the Commissioner's jurisdiction, provided that the interpretations, opinions, and 
guidance shall not have the force and effect of rules of law.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-2.  Assessments and fees.
Banks shall pay the following assessments and fees into the OCOB within 10 days after receipt 
of an invoice:
(1) 
Annual assessments. – Each bank shall pay a cumulative assessment based on 
its total assets as shown on its report of condition made to the Commissioner as 
of December 31 each year or the date most nearly approximating the same, not 
to exceed the amount determined by applying the following schedule:
a. 
On the first fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) of assets, or fraction 
thereof, ten thousand dollars ($10,000).
b. 
On assets greater than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) but not more 
than two hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000), fourteen dollars 
($14.00) per hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or fraction thereof.
c. 
On assets greater than two hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000), 
but not more than five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000), eleven 
dollars ($11.00) per hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or fraction 
thereof.
d. 
On assets greater than five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000), but 
not more than one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000), seven dollars 
($7.00) per hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or fraction thereof.
e. 
On assets greater than one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000), but not 
more than ten billion dollars ($10,000,000,000), four dollars ($4.00) per 
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or fraction thereof.
f. 
On assets greater than ten billion dollars ($10,000,000,000), two dollars 
($2.00) per hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or fraction thereof.
(2) 
Assessments on trust assets. – Each bank shall pay an assessment on trust assets 
held by it in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per hundred thousand dollars 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
49
($100,000) of trust assets, or fraction thereof, except that banks are not required 
to pay assessments on real estate held as trust assets.
(3) 
Special assessments. – If the Commissioner determines that the financial 
condition or manner of operation of a bank warrants further examination or an 
increased level of supervision, or in the event of a combination or conversion, 
the Commissioner may charge, and the institutions shall pay, an assessment 
equal to the reasonable cost of further examination, increased level of 
supervision, or supervision with regard to the combination or conversion. The 
Commissioner's determination of the cost of further examination shall be, in the 
absence of manifest error, dispositive of the issue of reasonableness.
(4) 
In the first half of each calendar year, the Commission shall review the 
estimated cost of maintaining each division of the OCOB for the next fiscal 
year. If the estimated assessments provided for under this Chapter for any 
division shall exceed the estimated cost of maintaining that division for the next 
fiscal year, then the Commission may reduce by a uniform percentage any 
assessments provided for in this Chapter for that division. If the estimated 
assessments provided for in this Chapter for any division shall be less than the 
estimated cost of maintaining that division for the next fiscal year, then the 
Commission may increase by a uniform percentage any assessments provided 
for in this Chapter for that division to an amount that will increase the amount of 
assessments to be collected to an amount at least equal to the estimated cost of 
maintaining that division of the OCOB for the next fiscal year.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-3.  Reports required of banks.
(a) 
Each bank shall file the following with the Commissioner, at such times, on such forms, 
and in such formats as the Commissioner may require:
(1) 
Annual reports of conditions.
(2) 
Periodic reports for interim periods within a year, not less than monthly in any 
case.
(b) 
In addition to the reports filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, each bank shall 
provide to the Commissioner copies of all applications and reports of condition filed by it under 
applicable federal law contemporaneously with the filing of such application and reports by the 
bank with its primary federal regulator.
(c) 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit the authority of the Commissioner to 
request and obtain other information that the Commissioner may deem necessary to discharge the 
duties of the Commissioner under this Chapter.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-4.  Examination by Commissioner.
(a) 
The Commissioner may examine everything relating to the business of a bank or its 
holding company, and may appoint examiners to make such examination. The examiners shall file 
with the Commissioner a full report of the findings resulting from the examination, including any 
violation of law or any unauthorized or unsafe practices of the bank or the holding company 
disclosed by the examination.
(b) 
Examinations under subsection (a) of this section shall be conducted pursuant to 
practices and procedures established by the OCOB, provided the Commissioner may take into 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
50
consideration the guidelines and requirements for such activity of the primary federal supervisor of 
the bank or holding company.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall furnish a copy of the report of examination to the bank or the 
holding company examined and may, upon request, furnish a copy of the report to the primary 
federal regulator of the bank or its holding company and to the FDIC if not the bank's primary 
federal regulator.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-5.  Examination of affiliates.
The Commissioner, at his or her discretion, may examine the affiliates of a bank to the extent it 
is necessary to safeguard the interest of depositors and creditors of the bank and of the general 
public, and to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Commissioner may conduct the 
examination in conjunction with any examination of the bank or an affiliate thereof conducted by 
any other state or federal regulatory authority.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-6.  Access to books and records; right to issue subpoenas, administer oaths, and 
examine witnesses.
(a) 
The Commissioner and the Commissioner's examiners and agents:
(1) 
Shall have free access to all books and records of a bank, its holding company, 
and their affiliates that relate to the business of the bank or the holding company, 
and the books and records kept by an officer, agent, or employee of the bank or 
holding company relating to or upon which any record is kept.
(2) 
May subpoena witnesses and administer oaths or affirmations in the 
examination of any director, officer, agent, or employee of the bank, its holding 
company, or their affiliates or of any other person in relation to affairs, 
transactions, and conditions of the bank, its holding company, or their affiliates.
(3) 
May require the production of the records, books, papers, contracts, and other 
documents of a bank, its holding company, and their affiliates.
(4) 
May order that improper entries be corrected on the books and records of a 
bank, its holding company, and the bank's affiliates.
(b) 
The Commissioner may issue subpoenas duces tecum.
(c) 
If a person fails to comply with a subpoena so issued or a party or witness refuses to 
testify on any matters, a court of competent jurisdiction, on the application of the Commissioner, 
may compel compliance by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the 
requirements of a subpoena issued from the court or a refusal to testify in the court.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-7.  Examiner making false report.
If any bank examiner shall knowingly and willfully make any false or fraudulent report of the 
condition of any bank that the examiner has examined with the intent to aid or abet the bank or its 
affiliates in committing violations of any provision of this Chapter, or if any examiner shall keep or 
accept any bribe or gratuity given for the purpose of inducing the examiner not to file any report of 
examination of any bank, or if any examiner shall neglect to make an examination of any bank by 
reason of having received or accepted any bribe or gratuity, the examiner shall be guilty of a Class 
H felony.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-8.  Examiner disclosing confidential information.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
51
If any examiner or other employee of the OCOB fails to keep secret the facts and information 
obtained in the course of an examination of a bank except as permitted or required by this Chapter, 
the examiner shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-9.  Loans or gratuities forbidden.
(a) 
No bank, or any officer, director, employee, or affiliate thereof, shall make an extension 
of credit or grant any gratuity to the Commissioner, any deputy commissioner, or any bank 
examiner. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and may be 
fined a sum equal to the amount of the extension made or the gratuity given. If the Commissioner, 
any deputy commissioner, or any bank examiner accepts an extension of credit or gratuity from any 
bank, or from any officer, director, employee, or affiliate thereof, that individual shall be guilty of a 
Class 1 misdemeanor and may be fined a sum equal to the extension of credit made or the gratuity 
given.
(b) 
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the Commissioner may 
exempt from the application of subsection (a) any deputy commissioner or any bank examiner with 
respect to any extension of credit existing upon the hiring of the deputy commissioner or bank 
examiner by the OCOB and any extension of the term or renewal of such extension of credit made 
thereafter, so long as the extension of term or renewal has terms and conditions generally available 
to customers of the applicable bank having generally the same creditworthiness as the deputy 
commissioner or bank examiner.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-10.  Willfully and maliciously making derogatory reports.
Any person who shall willfully and maliciously make, circulate, transmit, or otherwise 
communicate any statement, rumor, or suggestion to one or more other persons that is directly or by 
inference false and derogatory to the financial condition, or affects the solvency or financial 
standing, of any bank, or who shall counsel, aid, procure, or induce another to make, circulate, 
transmit, or otherwise communicate any such statement or rumor, shall be guilty of a Class 1 
misdemeanor.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-11.  Misapplication, embezzlement of funds.
(a) 
Any person who, with intent to defraud or injure a bank or any other person or with 
intent to deceive an officer of the bank or an employee of the OCOB appointed to examine the 
affairs of the bank, commits any of the following acts shall be guilty of a felony:
(1) 
Embezzles, converts, or misapplies any of the money, funds, credit, or property 
of the bank, whether owned by it or held in trust.
(2) 
Issues or puts forth a certificate of deposit; draws an order or bill of exchange; 
makes an acceptance; assigns a note, bond, draft, bill of exchange, mortgage, 
judgment, or decree; or fictitiously borrows or solicits, obtains, or receives 
money for a bank not in good faith.
(3) 
Makes or permits to be made a false entry in a record of a bank, or conceals or 
permits to be concealed, by any means or manner, the true and correct entries in 
a record of a bank.
(4) 
Knowingly makes an extension of credit, or permits an extension of credit, by a 
bank to any insolvent person or to a person who has ceased to exist, or that never 
had any existence, or upon collateral consisting of stocks or bonds of an 
insolvent or nonexistent person.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
52
(5) 
Makes or publishes, or knowingly permits to be made or published, a false 
report, statement, or certificate as to the true financial condition of a bank.
(b) 
If an offense committed under this section involves money, funds, credit, or property 
with a value of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more, it is a Class C felony. If an 
offense committed under this section involves money, funds, credit, or property with a value of less 
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), it is a Class H felony.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-12.  Enforcement of the banking laws.
(a) 
When the Commissioner believes that a violation of the banking laws has occurred or is 
continuing, the Commissioner may order an examination or investigation of the facts and 
circumstances relating to the suspected violation.
(b) 
Every bank failing to make and transmit any report that the Commissioner is authorized 
to require by this Chapter, and in and according to the form prescribed by the Commissioner, 
within 10 business days after the receipt of a request or requisition therefor, or within the extension 
of time granted by the Commissioner, shall be notified by the Commissioner, and if the failure 
continues for five business days after the receipt of the notice, the delinquent bank shall be subject 
to a penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000). The penalty provided by this section shall be 
recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, and it shall be the duty of the 
Attorney General to prosecute all such actions.
(c) 
In addition to any other powers conferred by this Chapter, the Commissioner shall have 
the power to do the following:
(1) 
Order any bank, trust company, or subsidiary thereof, or any director, officer, or 
employee, or any other person the Commissioner is authorized to regulate, to 
cease and desist violating any provision of this Chapter or any lawful rule issued 
thereunder.
(2) 
Order any bank, trust company, or subsidiary thereof, or any director, officer, or 
employee, or any other person the Commissioner is authorized to regulate, to 
cease and desist from a course of conduct that is unsafe or unsound and that is 
likely to cause insolvency or dissipation of assets or is likely to jeopardize or 
otherwise seriously prejudice the interests of a depositor.
(d) 
Consistent with Article 3A of Chapter 150B of the General Statutes, notice and 
opportunity for hearing shall be provided before any of the actions authorized by this section shall 
be undertaken by the Commissioner. In cases involving extraordinary circumstances requiring 
immediate action, the Commissioner may take such action but shall promptly afford a subsequent 
hearing upon application to rescind the action taken.
(e) 
The Commissioner shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, compel their 
attendance, require the production of evidence, administer oaths, and examine any person under 
oath in connection with any subject related to a duty imposed or a power vested in the 
Commissioner.
(f) 
The Commissioner may impose a civil money penalty of not more than one thousand 
dollars ($1,000) for each violation by any bank, trust company, or subsidiary thereof, or any 
director, officer, or employee, or any other person the Commissioner is authorized to regulate, of an 
order issued under subdivision (1) of subsection (c) of this section. The Commissioner may impose 
a civil money penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that a 
bank, trust company, or subsidiary thereof, or any director, officer, or employee, or any other 
person the Commissioner is authorized to regulate, violates a cease and desist order issued under 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
53
subdivision (2) of subsection (c) of this section. The proceeds of civil money penalties imposed 
pursuant to this subsection, net of documented expenses of examination and enforcement, shall be 
remitted to the Civil Penalty and Forfeiture Fund in accordance with G.S. 115C-457.2.
(g) 
Administrative orders issued by the Commissioner and civil money penalties imposed 
for violation of such orders shall be subject to review by the Commission, which shall have power 
to amend, modify, or disapprove the same at any regular or special meeting.
(h) 
Notwithstanding any penalty imposed by the Commissioner, the Commission may, 
after notice of and opportunity for hearing, impose, enter judgment for, and enforce, by appropriate 
process, a penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) against any bank, trust company, 
or subsidiary thereof, or against any of its directors, officers, or employees, or any other person the 
Commissioner is authorized to regulate, for violating any lawful order of the Commission or 
Commissioner. The proceeds of civil money penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection, net of 
documented expenses of examination and enforcement, shall be remitted to the Civil Penalty and 
Forfeiture Fund in accordance with G.S. 115C-457.2.
(i) 
If the Commissioner believes that a violation of a criminal statute has occurred, the 
Commissioner may refer the matter to the appropriate prosecutorial agency.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-13.  Immediate action orders.
(a) 
In the event that the Commissioner determines that a bank has inadequate capital or 
insufficient capital or determines that immediate action is necessary to cause a bank to conduct its 
business in a safe and sound manner or to cause a bank or any of its directors, officers, or 
employees to cease from an act or course of conduct that threatens, or is reasonably probable of 
threatening, the financial integrity of the bank, the commissioner may order, as applicable, the 
bank to take such corrective action as the Commissioner deems necessary or may order the bank, 
director, officer, or employee to immediately cease such conduct, act, or course of conduct and to 
refrain therefrom in the future.
(b) 
Any order made under this section shall be effective upon issuance, provided, however, 
that the Commissioner shall promptly afford a subsequent hearing upon the order as provided in 
G.S. 53C-2-6.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-14.  Supervisory control.
(a) 
Whenever the Commissioner determines that a bank has insufficient capital and is 
conducting its business in an unsafe or unsound manner or in any fashion that threatens the 
financial integrity of the bank, the Commissioner may serve a notice of charges on the bank, 
requiring it to show cause why it should not be placed under supervisory control. The notice of 
charges shall specify the grounds for supervisory control and set the time and place for a hearing. A 
hearing before the Commissioner shall be held no earlier than seven days and no later than 15 days 
after issuance of the notice of charges.
(b) 
If, after the hearing provided in subsection (a) of this section, the Commissioner 
determines that supervisory control of the bank is necessary to protect the bank's customers, 
creditors, or the general public, the Commissioner shall issue an order taking supervisory control of 
the bank. The board of directors of the bank in office on the date of the issuance of the order may 
appeal the order of the Commissioner to the Commission pursuant to G.S. 53C-2-6 no later than 10 
days after the date of the issuance of the order.
(c) 
The Commissioner may appoint an agent to supervise and monitor the operations of the 
bank during the period of supervisory control. During the period of supervisory control, the bank 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
54
shall act in accordance with any instructions and directions as may be given by the Commissioner, 
directly or through the agent, and shall not act or fail to act except when to do so would violate an 
outstanding order of its federal bank supervisory agent or the FDIC if the FDIC is not its primary 
federal regulator.
(d) 
Within 180 days of the date of the order taking supervisory control, the Commissioner 
shall issue an order approving a plan for the termination of supervisory control on the 30th day 
following the issuance of the order. The plan may provide for the following:
(1) 
The issuance by the bank of debt instruments or shares.
(2) 
The appointment or removal of one or more officers and/or one or more 
directors.
(3) 
The reorganization or combination of the bank.
(4) 
A control transaction with respect to the bank.
(5) 
The dissolution and liquidation of the bank.
(e) 
The reasonable costs of the Commissioner under this section shall be paid by the bank. 
The Commissioner's determination of the costs shall be, in the absence of manifest error, 
dispositive of the issue of reasonableness.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-15.  Removal of directors, officers, and employees.
(a) 
If the Commissioner determines that a director, officer, or employee of a bank has 
participated in or consented to any violation of this Chapter or an order of the Commissioner, or has 
engaged in any unsafe or unsound business practice in the operation of the bank, or has been 
dishonest, incompetent, or reckless in the management of the affairs of the bank, or has persistently 
violated the laws of this State, or repeatedly violated or failed to comply with any of the bank's 
organizational documents, and that as a result, a situation exists requiring prompt corrective action 
in order to protect the bank, its customers, or the public, the Commissioner may issue an order 
temporarily removing the director, officer, or employee pending a hearing that shall occur not less 
10 days after removal. The order shall state that it is a "Temporary Order of Removal" and shall 
further state the grounds upon which it was issued together with the date, time, and location of a 
hearing on the matter. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may grant the director, officer, or 
employee subject to the order a 10-day extension of the hearing date, but the temporary removal 
order shall remain in full force and effect. Upon a hearing before the Commissioner within the 
prescribed time, the temporary removal order may be dissolved or made permanent in whole or in 
part.
(b) 
Any removal under this section is effective in all respects as if the removal had been 
made by the shareholders of the bank in question.
(c) 
Without the prior written approval of the Commissioner, no director, officer, or 
employee subject to an order under this section shall be eligible to be elected, reelected, or 
appointed any position as a director, officer, or employee of that bank or any other North Carolina 
financial institution during the period of the order's effect.
(d) 
An individual who is the subject of an order of the Commissioner under this section 
may appeal the order to the Commission pursuant to G.S. 53C-2-6 no later than 10 days after the 
date of issuance of the order.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-16.  Emergency powers.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
55
In the event of a natural disaster or other national, regional, state, or local emergency, the 
Commissioner may temporarily waive or suspend requirements for compliance by one or more 
banks with any provisions of this Chapter.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-8-17.  Interstate regulatory agreements.
The Commissioner may enter into cooperative, coordinating, and information sharing 
agreements with (i) any bank supervisory agency having jurisdiction over an out-of-state bank that 
operates one or more branches in this State and (ii) any bank supervisory agency of another state in 
which a bank operates one or more branches with respect to the periodic examination or other 
supervision of the branches of the out-of-state bank operating in this State or the branches of the 
bank operating in such other state.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 9.
Supervisory Liquidation; Voluntary Dissolution and Liquidation.
Part 1. General Provisions.
§ 53C-9-101.  Supervisory combinations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in order to protect the public, including 
depositors and creditors of a bank, the Commissioner, upon making a finding that a bank is unable 
to operate in a safe and sound manner and is not reasonably likely to be able to resume safe and 
sound operations, may authorize or require a combination of the bank, a control transaction, or any 
other transaction, whether or not the Commissioner has taken supervisory control pursuant to G.S. 
53C-8-14. In ordering any such combination, control transaction, or other transaction, the 
Commissioner may order that a vote of the bank's shareholders shall not be required to effect the 
combination, control transaction, or other transactions.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-102.  Distributions; assignments restricted.
A bank that is in the process of involuntary or voluntary dissolution pursuant to this Article 
may not make or pay distributions to its shareholders unless the bank has the prior written approval 
of the Commissioner. No bank shall make any general assignment for the benefit of its creditors 
except by surrendering possession of its assets to the Commissioner for dissolution and liquidation 
pursuant to G.S. 53-9-301, and any other purported assignment by the bank for the benefit of its 
creditors shall be void.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-103.  Cancellation of charter.
Whenever a combination, dissolution, or other transaction occurs by which a bank ceases to 
exist or ceases to be eligible for a charter, the Commissioner shall by order cancel the bank's charter 
and shall publish the order in accordance with G.S. 53-1-4(59). A copy of the order shall be filed by 
the Commissioner with the Secretary of State. The bank shall continue to exist under Chapter 55 of 
the General Statutes for the purpose of dissolving and liquidating its business and affairs.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
Part 2. Voluntary Dissolution and Liquidation.
§ 53C-9-201.  Voluntary dissolution prior to receipt of charter.
A bank in formation may, prior to issuance of its charter, give notice to the Commissioner and, 
with the Commissioner's consent, abandon its application to the Commissioner and dissolve and 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
56
liquidate by a majority vote of its board of directors and as provided under Chapter 55 of the 
General Statutes.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-202.  Voluntary dissolution.
(a) 
With the approval of the Commissioner, a bank may engage in a voluntary dissolution 
and liquidation.
(b) 
If, by a majority vote, the board of directors of a bank should determine that in their 
judgment the bank should be dissolved and liquidated, then the board of directors shall submit 
immediately to the Commissioner the following documents, certified by an appropriate officer of 
the bank:
(1) 
The board of directors' resolution.
(2) 
The bank's proposed articles of dissolution.
(3) 
The board of directors' plan for liquidation.
(4) 
Any notices or proxy solicitation materials proposed to be sent to shareholders.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall examine the documents submitted under subsection (b) of this 
section and such other matters as the Commissioner deems relevant and may issue an order 
authorizing the bank and its board of directors to proceed with dissolution and liquidation as 
provided in G.S. 53C-9-203. Examination by the Commissioner of the materials referred to in 
subsection (b)(4) of this section shall not be deemed to be approval of the documents for any 
purpose.
(d) 
At any annual or special meeting of shareholders called for the purpose of voting upon a 
proposal for voluntary dissolution of a bank, the shareholders of the bank may, by an affirmative 
vote, in person or by proxy, of the holders of shares representing at least two-thirds of the votes 
entitled to be cast on such matters, resolve to dissolve and liquidate the bank in accordance with the 
order of the Commissioner issued under subsection (c) of this section.
(e) 
If a majority of the board of directors of a bank should determine that in its best 
judgment the bank should be dissolved and liquidated but deems it impractical or otherwise 
inadvisable to proceed with a vote upon voluntary dissolution by the shareholders, then the board 
of directors shall immediately forward a certified copy of its resolution to the Commissioner and 
the Commissioner shall place the bank in receivership pursuant to G.S. 53C-9-301.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-203.  Voluntary dissolution and liquidation procedure.
(a) 
At the appropriate time, the Commissioner shall do the following:
(1) 
Inform the FDIC and the bank's federal supervisory agency if other than the 
FDIC.
(2) 
Select and appoint a receiver or receiver in liquidation, just as if the liquidation 
were involuntary under G.S. 53C-9-301.
(3) 
Attach a certificate of approval to the articles of dissolution, and the bank shall 
then file the certified articles with the Secretary of State.
(b) 
Upon the filing of the articles of dissolution with the Secretary of State, it shall be 
unlawful for the bank to accept any additional deposit accounts or additions to deposit accounts or 
make any additional extensions of credit, but all its income and receipts in excess of actual 
expenses of liquidation of the bank shall be applied to the discharge of its liabilities.
(c) 
The persons charged with liquidation of the bank in the approved plan of dissolution 
shall cause to be published a public notice stating the bank has closed and will dissolve and 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
57
liquidate and notifying its depositors and creditors to present their claims for payment, specifying 
the method for doing so.
(d) 
The bank may pay reasonable compensation, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, to the persons charged with its liquidation.
(e) 
Any bank in the process of voluntary dissolution and liquidation shall be subject to 
examination by the Commissioner and shall furnish any reports required by the Commissioner.
(f) 
If the Commissioner determines at any time that the voluntary liquidation plan is not 
working, the Commissioner may place the bank in receivership pursuant to G.S. 53C-9-301.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
Part 3. Receivership; Involuntary Dissolution.
§ 53C-9-301.  Receivership.
(a) 
The Commissioner may take custody of the books, records, and assets of every kind and 
character of any bank in the instances established in Part 2 of this Article or if it reasonably appears 
from one or more examinations made by the Commissioner that any of the following conditions 
exist:
(1) 
The directors or officers of the bank, or the liquidators of the bank subject to a 
voluntary plan of liquidation, have neglected, failed, or refused to take action 
that the Commissioner deems necessary for the protection of the bank.
(2) 
The directors, officers, or liquidators of the bank have impeded or obstructed an 
examination.
(3) 
The business of the bank is being conducted in a fraudulent, illegal, or unsafe 
manner.
(4) 
The bank is in an unsafe or unsound condition to transact business and it is not 
reasonably probable that it will be able to return to a safe and sound condition.
(5) 
The capital of the bank is impaired such that the likely realizable value of its 
assets is insufficient to pay and satisfy the claims of all depositors and all 
creditors.
(6) 
The directors or officers of the bank, or the liquidators of a bank subject to a 
voluntary plan of liquidation, have assumed duties or performed acts in excess 
of those authorized by applicable statutes or regulations, by the bank's 
organizational documents or plan of liquidation, or without supplying the 
required bond.
(7) 
The bank is insolvent or is in imminent danger of insolvency or has suspended 
its ordinary business transactions due to insufficient funds.
(8) 
The bank is unable to continue operations.
(b) 
Unless the Commissioner reasonably finds that an emergency exists that requires that 
the Commissioner take custody immediately, the Commissioner shall first give written notice to 
the board of directors of the bank specifying which of those circumstances listed in subdivisions 
(1) through (8) of subsection (a) have been determined to exist and shall allow a reasonable time in 
which corrections may be made before a receiver of the bank will be appointed as outlined in 
subsections (c) and (d) of this section. For these purposes, "written notice" shall be deemed to 
include any report of examination or other confidential or nonconfidential written communication 
that is either directly from the Commissioner or is joined in by the Commissioner.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall appoint as receiver or coreceivers one or more qualified 
persons for the purpose of receivership and liquidation of the bank of which the Commissioner has 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
58
taken custody under subsection (a) of this section, which receiver shall furnish a bond in such form 
and amount, and with such surety, as the Commissioner may require.
(d) 
The Commissioner may appoint the FDIC or its nominee as the receiver, and the 
receiver shall be permitted to serve without posting bond. In the event of such an appointment, the 
Commissioner shall thereafter be forever relieved of any and all responsibility and liability in 
respect to the receivership and the liquidation of the bank.
(e) 
In the event the Commissioner takes custody of a bank and then appoints a receiver for 
the bank, the Commissioner shall serve personally at the bank's principal office through the officer 
who is present and appears to be in charge, the Commissioner's order taking possession and, if 
applicable, the Commissioner's order appointing a receiver for the bank in liquidation. The 
Commissioner shall also mail a certified copy of the order taking possession and the appointing 
order by certified mail or by express delivery to any previous receiver or other legal custodian of 
the bank and to the Clerk of Superior Court of Wake County. The Commissioner shall give notice 
to the public of the Commissioner's actions by posting a notice summarizing the Commissioner's 
actions near the entrance to each branch of the bank, and the Commissioner shall issue a similar 
public notice as defined in G.S. 53C-1-4(59).
(f) 
Whenever a receiver for a bank is duly appointed and qualified under subsection (c) or 
(d) of this section:
(1) 
The receiver, by operation of law and without any conveyance or other 
instrument, act, or deed, shall succeed to all the rights, titles, powers, and 
privileges of the bank, its shareholders, officers, and directors, or any of them, 
and to the titles to the books, records, and assets of every description of any 
previous receiver or other legal custodian of the bank. Neither the shareholders, 
officers, or directors, nor any of them, shall thereafter, except as expressly 
provided in this section, have or exercise any rights, powers, or privileges or act 
in connection with any assets or property of any nature of the bank in 
receivership.
(2) 
The Commissioner may, at any time, direct the receiver (unless it is the FDIC) 
to return the bank to its previous or a newly constituted management and its 
shareholders.
(3) 
A receiver, other than the FDIC, may, at any time during the receivership and 
before final liquidation, be removed and a replacement appointed by the 
Commissioner.
(g) 
A receiver may perform any of the following acts:
(1) 
Demand, sue for, collect, receive, and take into possession all the goods and 
chattels, rights and credits, moneys and effects, lands and tenements, books, 
papers, choses in action, bills, instruments, notes, intangible interests, and 
property of every description of the bank.
(2) 
Foreclose mortgages, deeds of trust, and other liens granted to the bank to the 
extent the bank would have the right to do so.
(3) 
Seek injunctions and institute suits for the recovery of any property, damages, or 
demands existing in favor of the bank, and shall, upon the receiver's own 
application, be substituted as party plaintiff in the place of the bank in any suit 
or proceeding pending at the time of the receiver's appointment.
(4) 
Sell, convey, and assign any or all of the property rights and interests owned by 
the bank.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
59
(5) 
Appoint agents and engage independent contractors.
(6) 
Examine papers and investigate persons.
(7) 
Make and carry out agreements with the FDIC for the payment or assumption of 
the bank's liabilities, in whole or in part, and to sell, convey, transfer, pledge, or 
assign assets as security or otherwise and to make guarantees in connection 
therewith.
(8) 
Perform all other acts that might be done by the employees, officers, and 
directors of the bank.
These powers shall be continued in effect until liquidation of the bank or until return of the 
bank to its prior or newly constituted management.
(h) 
The Commissioner may, unless the FDIC has been appointed as receiver, determine 
that the receivership proceedings of a bank should be discontinued and the possession of the bank 
returned to newly constituted management. The Commissioner shall then remove the receiver and 
restore all the rights, powers, and privileges of the bank's depositors, shareholders, customers, 
employees, officers, and directors. The return of a bank to a newly constituted management from 
the possession of a receiver shall, by operation of law and without any conveyance or other 
instrument, act, or deed, vest in the bank the title to all property held by the receiver in the capacity 
as receiver for the bank.
(i) 
Claims against a bank in receivership shall have the following order of priority for 
payment:
(1) 
Costs, expenses, and debts of the bank incurred on or after the date of the 
appointment of the receiver, including compensation for the receiver and a 
reasonable sum for the time of employees and agents of the OCOB.
(2) 
Claims of holders of deposit accounts.
(3) 
Claims of secured creditors in such order of priority as is established by 
applicable law or regulation.
(4) 
Claims of general creditors.
(5) 
Claims of holders of the bank's shares in the order of preference established by 
the bank's organizational documents.
(j) 
All claims of each class described within subsection (i) of this section shall be paid in 
full so long as sufficient assets are available therefor. Members of a class for which the receiver 
cannot make payment in full shall be paid an amount proportionate to their total claims.
(k) 
The Commissioner may direct the receiver to make payment of claims for which no 
provision is made in this section and may direct the payment of less than all claims within a class.
(l) 
When all assets of the bank have been fully liquidated, all claims and expenses have 
been paid or settled, and the receiver has recommended a final distribution, the dissolution of the 
bank in receivership shall be accomplished in the following manner:
(1) 
The receiver shall file with the Commissioner a detailed report, in a form to be 
prescribed by the Commissioner, of the receiver's acts and proposed final 
distribution of the bank's assets.
(2) 
Upon the Commissioner's approval of the final report of the receiver, the 
receiver shall make the final distribution of the bank's assets in any manner as 
the Commissioner may direct.
(3) 
When any unclaimed property, including funds due to a known but unlocated 
depositor, remains following the final distribution of the bank's assets, such 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
60
property shall be promptly transferred to the State Treasurer to hold in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 115B of the General Statutes.
(4) 
Upon completion of the actions described in this subsection, the process of 
dissolution and liquidation of the bank shall be deemed complete, and the 
Commissioner shall issue a certification of completed liquidation to the 
Secretary of State.
(5) 
Upon completion of the process of dissolution and liquidation, the 
Commissioner shall cause an examination of the receiver's activities and 
records to be conducted, with which the receiver shall assist. The accounts of 
the receiver shall then be ruled upon by the Commissioner, and if approved, the 
receiver shall be given a final and complete discharge and release.  (2012-56, s. 
4.)
Part 4. Provisions Relating to Any Dissolution or Receivership.
§ 53C-9-401.  Article relating to receivers applicable to insolvent banks.
Article 38A of Chapter 1 of the General Statutes, relating to receivers, when not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Article, applies to the liquidation of banks under this Article.  (2012-56, 
s. 4; 2021-93, s. 9.)
§ 53C-9-402.  Storage and destruction of records.
(a) 
Any record of a bank that is in or has completed the process of dissolution and 
liquidation may be kept in compliance with the provisions of G.S. 53C-6-14.
(b) 
All records of a bank that has completed the process of dissolution and liquidation shall 
be held in such place as in the Commissioner's judgment will provide for their proper safekeeping 
and protection.
(c) 
After the expiration of five years from the date of filing of the certificate of completed 
liquidation under G.S. 53C-9-301, the records of the liquidated bank may be destroyed by the 
Commissioner using commercially reasonable record destruction procedures.
(d) 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the destruction by the 
Commissioner of any of the records of the OCOB made by it with reference to the dissolution, 
receivership, or liquidation of any bank.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-403.  Authority to serve as trustee terminated.
Whenever any bank that has been, or shall be, appointed trustee in any indenture, deed of trust, 
or other instrument of like character, executed to secure the payment of any bonds, notes, or other 
evidences of indebtedness, has been or shall be placed in receivership, a new trustee shall be 
appointed in the manner provided in G.S. 36C-7-704 or other applicable law, and the powers and 
duties of the bank as trustee in any such instrument shall immediately cease.  (2012-56, s. 4; 
2013-29, s. 19.)
§ 53C-9-404.  Petition for new trustee; upon parties interested.
In all cases of dissolution receivership and liquidation under this Article, the clerk of superior 
court of any county in which an indenture, deed of trust, or other instrument of like character is 
recorded shall, upon the verified petition of any person interested in any such trust, either as 
trustee, beneficiary, or otherwise, which interest shall be set out in the petition, enter an order 
directing service, in the manner required by law for service of summons, on all interested parties of 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
61
a notice requiring all persons having any interest in the trust to appear at the clerk's office on a day 
designated in the order and notice, not less than 30 days from the date of the first publication of the 
notice, and show cause why a new trustee shall not be appointed. The notice shall set forth the 
names of the parties to the indenture, deed of trust, or other such instrument, and the date the 
documents were executed and the place of recording.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-405.  Appointment of substitute trustee where no objection made.
If, upon the day fixed in the notice, no person appears and objects to the appointment of a 
substitute trustee, the clerk of superior court shall, upon such terms as he or she deems advisable to 
the best interest of all parties, appoint a competent person authorized to act as substitute trustee, 
who shall be vested with and shall exercise all the powers conferred upon the trustee named in the 
instrument.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-406.  Hearing where objection made; appeal from order.
If objection is made to the appointment of a new trustee under this Part, the clerk shall hear and 
determine the matter, and from his or her decision an appeal may be prosecuted as in cases of 
special proceedings generally.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-407.  Registration of final order.
The final order of appointment of a new trustee or trustees under this Part shall be certified by 
the clerk of superior court issuing the order and shall be recorded in the office of the register of 
deeds in the county or counties in which the instrument under which the appointment has been 
made is recorded.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-408.  Petition and order applicable to all instruments involved.
The petition and the order appointing a new trustee or trustees under this Part may apply to any 
number of indentures, deeds of trust, or other instruments, wherein the same trustee or trustees are 
named.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-9-409.  Additional remedy.
The appointment of a substitute trustee as described in this Part shall be in addition to and not 
substitution for any other remedy provided by law.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Article 10.
Bank Holding Companies.
Part 1. Change in Control.
§ 53C-10-101.  Holding companies.
Every holding company, as defined in G.S. 53C-1-4(39), that directly or indirectly controls a 
depository institution or nonbank subsidiary that has an office located in this State shall register 
with the Commissioner and maintain that registration on an annual basis in the form prescribed by 
the Commissioner.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2017-165, s. 10.)
§ 53C-10-102.  Holding company control transaction.
(a) 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this section, a person shall not engage in a 
control transaction to which a holding company formed under the laws of this State and having a 
bank as a subsidiary is a party without the prior approval of the Commissioner. A person may 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
62
contract to engage in a control transaction with the consummation of the control transaction being 
subject to receipt of the approval of the Commissioner.
(b) 
The Commissioner may require a person who is obligated to file a notice or an 
application under this section to appoint an agent resident in this State for service of process upon 
the filing of the notice or application or as a condition to the acceptance of the notice or application 
for review. An application for approval shall be in a form required by the Commissioner and shall 
be accompanied by such fee as may be required by rule.
(c) 
The following transactions shall not constitute a control transaction under this section 
requiring the prior approval of the Commissioner:
(1) 
The acquisition of control over voting securities by a person who has previously 
engaged in a control transaction with respect to the holding company after 
receiving the approval of the Commissioner under this Article, which approval 
permits the acquisition of control over additional voting securities, or any 
person who is an affiliate of the person previously engaging in the approved 
control transaction with such permission and who is identified in the application 
submitted for the approval, if the acquiring person files a notice with the 
Commissioner, in the form required by the Commissioner, describing the 
transaction at least 10 days before the acquiring person or affiliate thereof first 
votes or directs the voting of the voting securities.
(2) 
An acquisition of control over voting securities by operation of law, will, or 
intestate succession, if the acquiring person files a notice with the 
Commissioner, in the form required by the Commissioner, describing the 
acquisition or transfer at least 10 days before the acquiring person first votes or 
directs the voting of the voting securities.
(3) 
Bona fide gifts.
(4) 
A transaction exempted by rules, orders, or declaratory rulings of the 
Commissioner, issued because approval of the transaction is not necessary to 
achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
(5) 
An acquisition of control over voting shares exempt from the prior approval 
requirements set forth in section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, as 
amended (12 U.S.C. § 1842), pursuant to the exceptions described in items (A), 
(B), or (C) of subsection (a) of that section.
(6) 
An acquisition of control over voting securities in a transaction subject to 
approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company Act, as amended (12 
U.S.C. § 1842).
(d) 
Upon receipt of a notice described in subsection (c) of this section, the Commissioner 
may, before the 10th day following the receipt, notify the acquiring person of the Commissioner's 
objection to the exercise of control over the voting securities or may require the acquiring party to 
submit further information before exercising control over the voting securities. An acquiring 
person receiving a notice of objection shall be required to submit an application for approval of a 
control transaction. An acquiring person receiving a notice to submit further information may be 
required to provide any information that would be included in an application for approval of a 
control transaction. In the event such an acquiring person is comprised of a group of persons, the 
Commissioner may require each member of the group to submit relevant information.
(e) 
All voting securities over which control has been acquired by an acquiring person shall 
not be voted on any matter submitted to a vote of the holders of the outstanding voting securities of 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
63
the holding company of a bank and shall be deemed authorized but unissued for purposes of 
determining the presence of a quorum of holders of voting securities until such time as follows:
(1) 
The Commissioner has approved an application for approval of a control 
transaction with respect to the voting securities.
(2) 
The transaction is one listed in subsection (c) of this section that does not 
require the filing of a notice with the Commissioner.
(3) 
The transaction is one listed in subsection (c) of this section that requires a 
notice to be filed with the Commissioner and the Commissioner has not issued 
an objection to the notice and any requirement of the Commissioner for the 
filing of further information had been determined by the Commissioner to have 
been satisfied.  (2012-56, s. 4; 2013-29, s. 20.)
§ 53C-10-103.  Application regarding a control transaction.
(a) 
A person seeking approval of a control transaction to which a holding company of a 
bank is a party under this Article shall file the following with the Commissioner:
(1) 
An application in the form prescribed by the Commissioner.
(2) 
All filing fees required by rule of the Commissioner.
(3) 
Any other information required by a rule of the Commissioner or deemed by the 
Commissioner to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
(b) 
In the event a person submitting an application is a group of persons, the Commissioner 
may require each member of the group to submit information relevant to the application.
(c) 
Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, information about the character, competence, 
or experience of an acquiring person or its proposed management personnel or affiliates shall be 
deemed a confidential record of the Commissioner subject to G.S. 53C-2-7(b).  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-104.  Public notice.
A person filing an application for approval of a control transaction shall publish a public notice 
of the filing of the application not more than 30 days before nor more than 10 days after the filing of 
the application with the Commissioner. The public notice shall contain the following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The name of the applicable holding company and the address of its principal 
office.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
proposed control transaction and that comments received by the Commissioner 
within 14 days of the publication of the public notice shall be considered. The 
public notice shall provide the current mailing address of the Commissioner.  
(2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-105.  Actions on control transaction applications.
(a) 
The Commissioner shall examine the proposed control transaction, including the 
character, competence, and experience of the acquiring person and its proposed management 
personnel, to determine whether the financial stability of the holding company or the interests of 
the customers served by one or more bank subsidiaries of the holding company would be adversely 
affected by the proposed control transaction. Not later than the 60th day following receipt of a 
completed application for approval of a control transaction unless extraordinary circumstances 
require a longer period of review, the Commissioner shall approve or deny the application.


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
64
(b) 
The Commissioner may deny an application for approval of a control for any of the 
following reasons:
(1) 
The financial condition of the person seeking approval of a control transaction 
could jeopardize the financial stability of the holding company, one or more 
bank subsidiaries of the holding company, or the financial interests of the bank's 
customers.
(2) 
An examination of the character, competence, or experience of any acquiring 
person or of any of the proposed management personnel of the holding 
company shows that it would not be in the interest of the customers of one or 
more of the bank subsidiaries of the holding company or in the interest of the 
public to permit the person to control the holding company.
(3) 
The plans or proposals of the person seeking approval with respect to exercising 
control over the holding company would not be in the best interests of the 
customers of one or more bank subsidiaries of the holding company.
(4) 
Upon the effective date of the proposed control transaction, one or more of the 
bank subsidiaries of the holding company would not be solvent, have 
inadequate capital, or not be in compliance with this Chapter or rules of the 
Commissioner.
(5) 
The application for approval is incomplete.
(6) 
If the acquiring person solicits votes for the approval of or consents to the 
control transaction from the holders of the voting securities of the holding 
company, adequate and complete disclosures of all material information about 
the proposed control transaction, together with a prominent statement that 
neither the control transaction nor any solicitation of such holders' votes or 
consents has been approved by the Commissioner and that any representation to 
the contrary is a criminal offense, have not been made to the holders.
(c) 
If an application filed under this Part is approved by the Commissioner, the control 
transaction may become effective. All conditions to approval set forth in the order of the 
Commissioner shall be enforceable against the person, and each member of a group of persons, 
receiving the approval.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-106.  Appeal.
Any order of the Commissioner denying an application for approval of a control transaction 
may be appealed to the Commission by the person filing the application denied, as provided in G.S. 
53C-2-6.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
Part 2. Combinations.
§ 53C-10-201.  Combination authority.
With the approval of the Commissioner, a holding company of a bank may combine with one or 
more other holding companies or other companies. The application for approval shall be in the 
form required by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be required by 
rule.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-202.  Combination application and investigation.
(a) 
A holding company of a bank seeking approval of a combination shall file with the 
Commissioner an application for approval, copies of the agreement under which the holding 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
65
company proposes to effect the combination, and any additional information that the 
Commissioner shall require by rule or as is required by the Commissioner in connection with the 
application in order to achieve the objectives of this Chapter.
(b) 
A holding company filing an application for approval of a combination shall publish a 
public notice of the filing of the application not more than 30 days before nor more than 10 days 
after the filing of the application with the Commissioner. The public notice shall contain the 
following:
(1) 
A statement that the application has been filed with the Commissioner.
(2) 
The names of the parties to the proposed combination and the addresses of its 
principal offices.
(3) 
A statement that any interested person may make written comment on the 
proposed combination and that comments received by the Commissioner within 
14 days of the publication of the public notice shall be considered. The public 
notice shall provide the current mailing address of the Commissioner.
(c) 
The Commissioner shall examine the proposed combination, including the character, 
competency, and experience of the proposed directors and executive officers of the surviving party 
of the combination, to determine whether the interests of the customers and communities served by 
the banks controlled by the parties to the combination would be adversely affected by the proposed 
combination.
(d) 
Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, information about the character, competence, 
and experience of the directors and executive officers of the parties to a combination received by 
the Commissioner shall be deemed a confidential record of the Commissioner subject to G.S. 
53C-2-7(b).  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-203.  Decision on application.
Based on the application and the Commissioner's examination, the Commissioner shall enter 
an order approving or denying approval of the proposed combination not later than the 60th day 
following the date the Commissioner notifies the parties that the application is complete, unless 
extraordinary circumstances require a longer period of review.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-204.  Appeal.
Any order of the Commissioner denying an application for approval of a combination may be 
appealed to the Commission by a party to the combination, as provided in G.S. 53C-2-6.  (2012-56, 
s. 4.)
Part 3. General Authority.
§ 53C-10-301.  Cease and desist order.
Upon a finding that any action of a holding company subject to registration under this Article, 
or its nonbank affiliate, may be in violation of any banking laws, the Commissioner, after a 
reasonable notice to the holding company and an opportunity for it to be heard, shall have the 
authority to order it to cease and desist from such action. If the holding company fails to appeal the 
decision within 10 days of the date of the issuance of the order in accordance with G.S. 53C-2-6, 
and continues to engage in the action in violation of the Commissioner's order to cease and desist 
such action, it shall be subject to a civil money penalty of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for 
each day it remains in violation of the order. The penalty provision of this section shall be in 
addition to and not in lieu of any other provision of law applicable to a holding company's failure to 


NC General Statutes - Chapter 53C 
66
comply with an order of the Commissioner. The clear proceeds of the civil money penalty shall be 
remitted to the Civil Penalty and Forfeiture Fund in accordance with G.S. 115C-457.2.  (2012-56, 
s. 4; 2013-29, s. 21.)
§ 53C-10-302.  Other control changes.
Each holding company of a bank shall report to the Commissioner any changes in its directors, 
president, chief executive officer, or chief financial officer by the close of the second day on which 
the holding company is open for business following the change.  (2012-56, s. 4.)
§ 53C-10-303.  Fees.
A holding company subject to this Article shall pay the following fees:
(1) 
An initial registration fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000).
(2) 
An annual registration fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(3) 
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the issuance of any certified copies of 
documents plus one dollar ($1.00) per page over a number of pages specified by 
the Commissioner.  (1983 (Reg. Sess., 1984), c. 1113, s. 1; 2017-165, s. 11.)
