C o m m i t t e e  o f  S p o n s o r i n g  O r g a n i z a t i o n s  o f  t h e  T r e a d w a y  C o m m i s s i o n
The information contained herein is of a general nature and based on authorities that are subject to change. Applicability of the information to 
specific situations should be determined through consultation with your professional adviser, and this paper should not be considered substitute 
for the services of such advisors, nor should it be used as a basis for any decision or action that may affect your organization.

September 2021
APPLYING THE COSO FRAMEWORK AND PRINCIPLES TO HELP 
IMPLEMENT AND SCALE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Keri Calagna  |  Brian Cassidy  |  Amy Park
Sponsored By
E n t e r p r i s e  R i s k  M a n a g e m e n t
REALIZE THE 
FULL POTENTIAL 
OF ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE


This project was commissioned by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO), which is dedicated to helping organizations improve performance by developing thought leadership 
that enhances internal control, risk management, governance, and fraud deterrence.
COSO is a private-sector initiative jointly sponsored and funded by the following organizations:
	 	 	
American Accounting Association (AAA)
	 	 	
American Institute of CPAs (AICPA)
	 	 	
Financial Executives International (FEI)
	 	 	
The Institute of Management Accountants (IMA)
	 	 	
The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
of the Treadway Commission
c o s o . o r g
Preface
COSO Board Members
Paul J. Sobel
COSO Chair
Douglas F. Prawitt
American Accounting Association
Jennifer Burns 
American Institute of CPAs (AICPA)
Daniel C. Murdock
Financial Executives International
Jeffrey C. Thomson
Institute of Management Accountants
Patty K. Miller
The Institute of Internal Auditors
Authors
Keri Calagna
Risk & Financial Advisory Principal 
Deloitte & Touche LLP
Brian Cassidy
Audit & Assurance Partner 
Deloitte & Touche LLP
Amy Park
Audit & Assurance Partner 
Deloitte & Touche LLP
Acknowledgements
We would like to recognize and thank John Fogarty, Senior Manager, Deloitte & Touche LLP, Hemant Dhengane, 
Manager, Deloitte & Touche LLP, Mary Schmidlin, Senior Manager, Deloitte & Touche LLP, and Edward Bowen, 
Managing Director, Deloitte & Touche LLP for their technical input and advice.
The COSO Board would like to thank Deloitte & Touche LLP for its support.  


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    i
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
September 2021
Research Commissioned by
Research Commissioned by
APPLYING THE COSO FRAMEWORK AND PRINCIPLES TO HELP 
IMPLEMENT AND SCALE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
E n t e r p r i s e  R i s k  M a n a g e m e n t
REALIZE THE 
FULL POTENTIAL 
OF ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE


c o s o . o r g
ii    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
Copyright © 2021, Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). 
1234567890 PIP 198765432
COSO images are from COSO Enterprise Risk Management - Integrating with Strategy and Performance ©2017, 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants on behalf of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO). COSO is a trademark of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, redistributed, transmitted, or displayed in any form or 
by any means without written permission. For information regarding licensing and reprint permissions, please contact the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, which handles licensing and permissions for COSO copyrighted materials. 
Direct all inquiries to copyright-permissions@aicpa-cima.com or AICPA, Attn: Manager, Licensing & Rights, 220 Leigh Farm 
Road, Durham, NC 27707 USA. Telephone inquiries may be directed to 888-777-7077. 
Design and production: Sergio Analco.


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    iii
Introduction	
	
1
The AI revolution: Transforming Business 
and Innovation	
	
3
The COSO ERM Framework: 
Addressing AI Risks Aligned with your 
Overall Business and IT Strategy	  	
7
Governance & Culture	
	
9
Strategy and Objective-Setting	
	
1 1
Performance	
	
13
Review and Revision	
	
17
Information, Communication, and Reporting	
19
Summary Remarks  	
	
21
About the Authors	
	
23
About COSO	
	
24
About Deloitte	
	
24
Contents	 	
Page


c o s o . o r g
iv    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    1
Artificial intelligence (AI) has and will continue to transform business strategies, solutions, and operations. AI-related 
risks need to be top of mind and a key priority for organizations to adopt and scale AI applications and to fully realize the 
potential of AI. Applying enterprise risk management (ERM) principles to AI initiatives can help organizations provide 
integrated governance of AI, manage risks, and drive performance to maximize achievement of strategic goals. The COSO ERM 
Framework, with its five components and twenty principles, provides an overarching and comprehensive framework, can align 
risk management with AI strategy and performance to help realize AI’s potential.
INTRODUCTION
MISSION, VISION 
& CORE VALUES
STRATEGY
DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS
OBJECTIVE
FORMULATION
IMPLEMENTATION
& PERFORMANCE
ENHANCED 
VALUE
Review 
& Revision
Information, 
Communication, 
& Reporting
Performance
Strategy & 
Objective-Setting
Governance 
& Culture
Figure 1. COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrating with Strategy and Performance Framework  
2017 COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrating with Strategy and Performance


c o s o . o r g
2    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    3
. . . . . . . . .
1   International Data Corporation (IDC), “Worldwide Spending on Artificial Intelligence is Expected to Double in Four Years, Reaching $110 Billion in 2024, According to New IDC 
Spending Guide,” August 25, 2020. https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS46794720
 
2  International Data Corporation (IDC), “IDC Forecasts Improved Growth for Global AI Market in 2021,” February 23, 2021. 
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47482321 
3  Gartner, Accelerating AI Deployments – Paths of Least Resistance, July 2020.
4  Deloitte, State of AI in the Enterprise, 3rd Edition, 2020. Figure 2, page 7.
5  Ibid., Figure 2, page 7.
6  Ibid., page 6.
7  Ibid., page 6.
As AI expands into almost every aspect of modern life, 
it’s becoming a required business capability. Whether it’s 
managing customer relationships, identifying and responding 
to cyber threats, or helping guide medical decisions, AI 
is addressing a wide range of business issues. The rapid 
adoption of AI is providing insight into organizations’ data 
that, in turn, provides intelligence to support decision-
making. This has led to organizations investing in AI 
initiatives at a massive scale. AI spending is forecast to 
double by 2024, growing from $50.1B in 2020 to over $110B in 
2024. The forecasted compound annual growth rate (CAGR) 
for this period is approximately 20%.1 Furthermore, worldwide 
revenues for the AI market, including software, hardware, 
and services, are forecast to grow to $327.5B in 2021 and 
reach $554.3B by 2024 with a five-year CAGR of 17.5%.2  
What’s fueling the revolution? Organizations are applying 
AI for its transformative potential: to automate business 
processes, tasks, and actions to reduce costs, increase 
efficiency, and improve predictability of outcomes. With AI, 
they are seeing better data insights, leading to more informed 
business decisions, positive business and operational 
results, and increased innovation.
THE AI REVOLUTION: 
TRANSFORMING BUSINESS AND INNOVATION
How organizations are using AI to drive value
COST REDUCTION
Applying AI to intelligently automate business 
processes, tasks, and interactions to reduce cost, 
increase efficiency, and improve predictability.
SPEED TO EXECUTION
Applying AI to accelerate time to operational and 
business results by minimizing latency.
PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS
Applying AI to provide insight into an 
organization’s data and to improve understanding 
and decision-making by deciphering patterns, 
connecting dots, and predicting outcomes from 
increasingly complex data sources.
DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT
Applying AI to change how humans interact 
with smart systems by expanding the means of 
engagement via voice, vision, text, and touch.
FUELED INNOVATION
Applying AI to generate insights for new products, 
market opportunities, and business models.
Recent studies indicate that organizations are 
moving to take advantage of these benefits with 
near-term investments in AI: 
•	75% of respondents expect to shift from piloting 
to operationalizing AI by the end of 2024.3  
•	75% of surveyed AI adopters are expecting 
organizational transformation within three years.4  
•	61% of surveyed AI adopters are anticipating 
industry transformation within the same 
timeframe.5 
•	Surveyed AI adopters are investing significantly, 
with 53% spending more than $20 million in 2020 
on AI-related technology and talent.6 
•	71% of surveyed AI adopters expect to increase 
investment in the next fiscal year, by an average 
of 26%.7


c o s o . o r g
4    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
To put organizational and industry transformation in 
perspective, many companies are investing in AI capabilities 
to pivot their business strategy. In some cases, AI underpins 
business models, such as the case of some financial 
technology companies moving away from traditional FICO 
scores and using multiple AI-powered parameters and models 
to inform credit decisions. The process is automated, making 
the effort more efficient, and it alerts users when cases need 
further review. It may improve decision-making and can 
enhance existing services and experience for customers.
An understanding of AI-associated algorithms 
and how they’re built is imperative to properly 
identify and manage AI-related risk. In practice, 
AI is developed by humans through the use of 
software programming (code). Similar to needing 
governance and controls in financial reporting or 
software development, due to the human element, 
organizations need governance and controls for AI 
as well. But boards and executives can’t effectively 
help monitor controls without a basic understanding 
of what AI does and how it is built. 
What algorithms do
There are three common classes of machine learning 
algorithms: non–deep-learning, deep-learning, and 
reinforcement learning. The goal of these AI models 
is to create a classification, a prediction, or the 
generation of novel data.
•	Non–deep-learning classifies, finds patterns, 
and predicts outcomes. Common models include 
regressions, clustering, decision trees, and support 
vector machines. They can help with many useful 
and common problems such as demand forecasting, 
cross-selling propensity, and risk classification.
•	Deep-learning algorithms have been a game 
changer. These methods of classifying and 
predicting have driven the AI revolution of the last 
decade. Imaging, natural language processing, 
and anomaly detection have achieved state-of-
the-art results using deep neural networks. The 
conversational bots that are helping people navigate 
customer service on a website comes from this AI 
technology. A simple automation can be applied 
more widely, such as voice-to-text on a cell phone, 
or it can be used to recognize and translate 
handwriting, utilizing the data to aid in the effort.
•	Reinforcement learning models examine an 
environment and develop the ability to make a 
sequence of decisions that aims to find the best 
positive path forward. Such models can learn to 
win Chess and Go tournaments against human 
grandmasters. Practical applications include route 
optimization, factory optimization, and cyber 
vulnerability testing. 
How algorithms are built
Every algorithm should link to the business 
strategy. Algorithms are designed by humans 
to contribute to informed decision-making that 
creates the intended business value. There are six 
key steps to building a machine learning model:
1.	 Problem definition – Considering a business 
problem and how machine learning could 
solve it.
2.	Data profiling – Identifying the data sources 
needed to solve the problem and what 
additional data is needed. An emerging trend 
within AI is the development of new sensors 
and data collection for the sole purpose of 
improving AI performance. Organizations need 
to ensure that data is fair and balanced across 
ethical and performance dimensions.
3.	Data preparation – Determining what’s needed 
to transform, normalize, and cleanse the data, 
and creating a testing and validation approach.
4.	Algorithm evaluation – Leveraging leading 
practices to select the algorithms required to 
solve the problem. Often, data science teams 
will develop multiple algorithms in parallel 
to determine the best performing model. It’s 
important to establish the correct performance 
evaluation criteria.
5.	Model development – Training, testing, and 
validating all identified algorithms with the 
data and implementing approaches like 
regularization.
6.	Model deployment, monitoring, and 
maintenance – Incorporating machine learning 
operations (MLOps) and monitoring structures 
along with processes to address model 
drift. Model performance can degrade if the 
activities in the environment change over time 
(for example, models that predict electricity 
consumption need to be updated over time as 
solar panels gain traction with consumers). 
AI and Machine Learning: A practical introduction


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    5
AI serves a wonderful world … until there’s an unfortunate outcome
As AI and machine learning deployment has increased, the top two benefits of deployment cited by surveyed adopters are 
increased process efficiency and enhancement of existing products and services. (See Figure 2) In addition, a survey conducted 
by Gartner indicates that the top two reasons for organizations to invest in AI capabilities are a desire to achieve an increase in 
revenue or a reduction in costs, and addressing vulnerabilities from competitors and start-ups.8  
AI drives efficiency through computer algorithms that use 
data to build predictions or prescriptive recommendations, 
generate classifications, and invent novel constructs. Many 
AI use cases implemented today are doing things humans can 
do but doing them much faster and more efficiently. Over the 
next ten years, the emphasis will likely evolve to implementing 
AI to do things humans can’t do because humans are unable 
to see the subtlety and nuances that AI can detect. For 
example, pharmaceutical companies can use AI to interpret 
nuances in microscopic images that human scientists can’t 
detect. This large-scale image-based cell profiling is quickly 
ascertaining the differences between large data sets of 
healthy and diseased cells in order to design highly specific 
new drug compounds to treat disease. In theory, researchers 
could make the comparisons by eye; however, comparing 
thousands of cells with tiny but consistent differences would 
be very difficult without the use of AI. In essence, AI is 
driving transformative innovation. These trends may further 
accelerate or evolve in the future. 
Although AI seems like a panacea for business transformation, 
the technology and application of the technology is not without 
risks that could result in serious problems for an organization. 
Those risks can be mitigated by thoughtful and pre-emptive 
consideration of the COSO ERM Framework. But first, let’s talk 
about the risks. There is a broad spectrum of AI-related risks 
that include, but are not limited to the following: 
•	 Bias and reliability breakdowns due to inappropriate or 
non-representative data
•	 Inability to understand or explain AI model outputs
•	 Inappropriate use of data
•	 Vulnerabilities to adversarial attack to obtain data or 
otherwise manipulate the AI model
•	 Societal stresses due to rapid application and 
transformation of AI technologies
. . . . . . . . .
8  2019 Gartner, AI in Organizations Survey. 735439_C.
Figure 2. Process Efficiency Tops the List of Benefits achieved with AI
Copyright © 2020 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
Lowering costs
Reducing headcount
Improving decision-making
Making processes more efficient
Enhancing relationships with clients/customers
Making employees
more productive
Discovering new insights
Enhancing existing products 
and services
Creating new products and services
Enabling new business models
30%
32%
34%
36%
38%
40%
42%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Percent who reported as top two potential benefits pursued
Percent who achieved outcome to a high degree
Blue dotted lines represent the average of respective dimensions
Source: State of AI in the Enterprise, 3rd Edition, Deloitte


c o s o . o r g
6    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
Potential consequences from these risks can include 
reputational damage, destruction of shareholder value, 
regulatory fines, and lawsuits. Because of such emerging 
risks, 56% of surveyed AI adopters say their organization 
is slowing the adoption of AI technologies.9 However, that 
may not be feasible for long if organizations are going to 
remain competitive. Rather than tapping the brakes, a more 
prudent strategy may be to better manage associated 
risks. Organizations cannot ignore risks or unintended 
consequences of AI.
Deloitte’s “State of AI in the Enterprise” survey illustrates 
that AI implementers and adopters have serious concerns 
about the use of AI that span a variety of risk areas beyond 
bias. (See Figure 3) Furthermore, respondents to the survey 
indicate that there are significant gaps in their organizations’ 
current abilities to address these concerns. Results from a 
separate survey conducted by Gartner cited the top barriers 
to AI implementation as security or privacy concerns 
and complexity of AI solution(s) integration with existing 
infrastructure.10
Impact of regulatory uncertainty
Regulatory requirements are another important consideration and adhering to regulatory compliance 
means not only following today’s legislation, but also demonstrating commitment to safe AI practices 
that may become required in the future. Organizations should consider the applicable extent of pending 
regulatory requirements in evaluating their governance framework over AI and related data.
Copyright © 2020 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
Example Players
The World Economic Forum’s Council  
on the Future of AI and Robotics 
Data & Society’s Intelligence and 
Autonomy Initiative 
AI Now Initiative
MIT Media Lab, AI, Ethics and  
Governance Project 
The Partnership on AI
The Stanford One Hundred Year Study 
on AI
The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical
Considerations in AI and Autonomous Systems 
The Cambridge Center for the Study of
Existential Risk 
Example Standards, Policy and Laws
EU General Data Protection Regulation 
affecting US companies operating in EU 
Product liability laws apply to individuals 
injured when using an AI-driven product 
Fair Credit Reporting Act, and the FTC’s 
enforcement against AI collusion 
Extra controls must be implemented around
conversational AI use cases to incorporate 
speech laws 
The Restatement of Torts relates to AI design 
and manufacturing defects, and failure to warn 
Speech laws applied to communication 
between bots and people 
Companies must monitor AI in the same way 
they do human employees 
(digital does not equal infallible)   
Extra care must be taken in developing 
warning labels for AI-driven products,  
e.g. “This product was audited with AI” 
Companies need to design policies around AI 
that meet expectations in even the most  
highly regulated markets  
Conclusion could be unintentional without 
transparency into AI methods, meaning  
companies need strong control in place  
Example Regulation
What it Means for Your Business
Bot Disclosure and Accountability Act of 2018 
to regulate news bots 
Social media bots already require disclosure 
that they are operating on AI; future 
regulation may go beyond social bots  
Figure 4. Regulatory compliance
Figure 3. Comparison of concern vs. preparedness for AI-related risks
Copyright © 2020 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
39%
62%
37%
37%
37%
39%
38%
37%
38%
38%
36%
40%
58%
57%
57%
55%
54%
53%
53%
53%
53%
52%
Cybersecurity vulnerabilities
AI failures affecting business operations
Consequences of using personal data without consent
New and changing regulations pertaining to AI
Liability for decisions and actions made by AI systems
Making bad decisions based on AI recommendations
Lack of transparency
Ethics issues
Potential job losses from AI-driven automation
Negative employee reactions
Backlash from customers
Fully prepared
Major/extreme concern
Source: Deloitte, State of AI in the Enterprise, 3rd Edition, 2020. 
. . . . . . . . .
9  Ibid., page 13.
10  2019 Gartner, AI in Organizations Survey. 729419_C.


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    7
As AI becomes more pervasive in business and our everyday 
lives, organizations will likely no longer have the option of 
ignoring or avoiding the unique risks that accompany AI 
adoption. Instead, they must learn to identify and manage 
these risks effectively. Compounding the problem is the fact 
that AI is often not isolated to a specific function such as 
IT, but rather affects multiple functions in an organization. 
Organizations need to design and implement governance, risk 
management, and control strategies and structures to realize 
the potential of humans collaborating with AI. Fortunately, AI 
is like other technological components of an organization and 
thus can be successfully governed by effective ERM. 
Since 1985, the voluntary, private-sector Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) has been focused on helping organizations improve 
THE COSO ERM FRAMEWORK:
ADDRESSING AI RISKS ALIGNED WITH 
YOUR OVERALL BUSINESS AND IT STRATEGY 
performance by developing thought leadership that enhances 
internal control, risk management, governance and fraud 
deterrence. The most recent update of the COSO ERM 
Framework – adopted in 2017 – highlights the importance 
of embedding it throughout an organization in five critical 
components:
	  Governance & Culture
	 Strategy & Objective-Setting
	 Performance
	 Review & Revision
	 Information, Communication, & Reporting 
By leveraging the COSO ERM Framework, organizations can identify and manage AI-specific risks and establish practices to 
optimize the results while managing exposure to risks like unintended bias and lack of transparency. Implementation can help to 
improve confidence among stakeholders within and outside the organization, and proactively address emerging risks related to AI.
MISSION, VISION 
& CORE VALUES
STRATEGY
DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS
OBJECTIVE
FORMULATION
IMPLEMENTATION
& PERFORMANCE
ENHANCED 
VALUE
Review 
& Revision
Information, 
Communication, 
& Reporting
Performance
Strategy & 
Objective-Setting
Governance 
& Culture
1.  Exercises Board Risk  
     Oversight
2.  Establishes Operating
     Structures 
3.  Defines Desired Culture  
4.  Demonstrates 
     Commitment 
     to Core Values
5.  Attracts, Develops, 
     and Retains Capable
     Individuals
6.  Analyzes Business
     Context
7.  Defines Risk Appetite
8.  Evaluates Alternative
     Strategies
9.  Formulates Business
     Objectives
10.  Identifies Risk 
11.  Assesses Severity
       of Risk
12.  Prioritizes Risks
13.  Implements Risk
       Responses
14.  Develops Portfolio 
       View
15.  Assesses Substantial
       Change
16.  Reviews Risk and
       Performance
17.  Pursues improvement  
       in Enterprise Risk                          
       Management
18.  Leverages Information  
       and Technology
19.  Communicates Risk
       Information
20.  Reports on Risk,
       Culture, and 
       Performance
Figure 5. COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrating with Strategy and Performance Framework  
2017 COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrating with Strategy and Performance


c o s o . o r g
8    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    9
GOVERNANCE & CULTURE
Governance and culture together form the basis for all 
risk management components. Governance reinforces the 
importance of ERM and culture is reflected in decision-making 
at all levels within an organization. According to the COSO 
ERM Framework, these components must incorporate an 
organization’s commitment to its vision, mission, and core 
values. Core values provide an important foundation for 
appropriate oversight of AI initiatives and AI models to help 
achieve the organization’s strategy and business objectives. 
The Governance & Culture component and the following 
principles of the COSO ERM Framework serve as the basis for 
this section of the paper: 
1 	Exercises board risk oversight
2 	Establishes operating structures
3 	Defines desired culture
4 	Demonstrates commitment to core value
5 	Attracts, develops and retains capable individuals
An organization’s board is often not involved in AI initiatives, 
or may not be fully aware of them to ask the appropriate risk-
related questions of management. When high-level executives 
and board members understand AI and its implications and 
are actively engaged, they set the tone from the top about 
the importance of risk management. Such engagement is 
imperative.
Only about 26% of surveyed AI adopters have a single 
executive responsible for managing AI-related risks.11 Similar 
to other core elements of a business, board members need 
to understand an organization’s framework for evaluating risk 
associated with AI initiatives and determine the threshold 
of risk that requires oversight from senior leadership. Some 
initiatives may be limited to a small number of simple AI 
models and have a lower risk profile. Other initiatives may 
have a large number of complex AI models or touch critical 
business activities like delivering patient health care, ensuring 
customer safety, or controlling manufacturing activities and 
have a higher risk profile. High-risk AI initiatives require close 
oversight by a senior executive, who collaborates with a chief 
The Importance of Governance

As AI is implemented on a broader scale within 
organizations, governance has a key role in appropriate 
oversight of AI initiatives and related models. 
Organizations are facing increased scrutiny from various 
stakeholders (e.g., regulators, customers, users, etc.) 
due, in part, to perceived inadequate oversight of AI.
Governance plays a key role in the following key areas:
1.	To support the development and operation of AI 
models, organizations are collecting unprecedented 
amounts of data. Participants have concerns, 
including but not limited to, how their data is being 
used and who else has access to their data. 
Organizations need to have clear rules regarding use 
of data, collection of data, retention of data, and 
access of data and consistently apply those rules 
throughout the organization as part of their response 
to those concerns. Failure to appropriately address 
these issues can harm people and inflict damage on 
corporate reputation and shareholder value. 
2.	Organizations are increasingly applying AI to 
situations that require more judgment and may 
have a significant impact on participants. AI models 
that perform or inform significant judgments (e.g., 
underwriting decisions, eligibility for various benefits, 
medical diagnosis, and recommended treatment, etc.) 
that have a significant impact on participants may 
introduce ethical concerns. As part of their response, 
organizations need to assess when, where, and how 
AI is or will be used and whether such use is consistent 
with the organization’s values and design, and how 
the organization’s oversight structures engage with 
larger societal concerns, if applicable.
risk officer or equivalent risk leader. Organizations may need to 
acquire personnel with expertise in AI development and data 
analysis to properly oversee their AI initiatives or seek external 
advisers with the relevant experience if the needed skillset is 
missing at the organization. These individuals can advise board 
members, provide insights into risks/rewards and promote 
risk-informed decision-making. Such involvement is critical to 
effective adoption and implementation of AI and prevention of 
organizational crisis events.
. . . . . . . . .
11  Ibid., based on average from Figure 9 on page 15.


c o s o . o r g
10    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
In addition, leaders need to understand how they define 
success when developing, deploying, monitoring, and 
maintaining AI and how it correlates to their company’s 
purpose. Important aspects of defining success include 
determining which measures or metrics are most applicable 
as well as how the organization identifies and assesses 
costs versus benefits. Those aspects are closely related 
to management tying AI initiatives with the organization’s 
broader commitment to its core values by providing the basis 
for enforcing accountability for actions and aligning risk-
aware behaviors and decision-making with performance. 
As such, organizations need a rigorous and controlled 
process to document the algorithm’s purpose as well as 
needs and goals for the organization. This should be included 
in an organization’s AI architecture document and related 
software development processes. 
Along with clear visibility for top executives and board 
members, governance of underlying data is key to 
effective ERM framework. For successful implementation, 
organizations must evaluate what data is needed to develop 
AI. AI algorithms use data to train and create a novel model. 
The models predict future outcomes as they receive new 
data. Necessary data governance considerations, drawing 
from core values, may include 1) representation of the 
appropriate population for the AI use case and reduction 
of bias; 2) clear rules for using and disseminating data, 
including privacy in data collection as well as disclosure of 
use and disposal; and 3) ways to secure data assets.
AI and the models that make it work also have to be 
closely monitored across an organization. In designing and 
implementing AI, six key dimensions may help safeguard 
ethics and build a trustworthy AI strategy for the company 
that people can embrace. Although currently there is no 
authoritative framework for AI ethics, Deloitte’s Trustworthy 
AI
TM Framework can serve as a means to understand and 
assess risks and ethical considerations that are specific 
to AI and can be a valuable lens to complement the COSO 
ERM Framework, especially as it relates to governance and 
performance. Organizations can use it to help determine and 
monitor ongoing risks. 
Figure 6. Deloitte’s Trustworthy AITM Framework 
Deloitte’s Trustworthy AI
TM  Framework (see Figure 6) includes 
the following:
•	 Fair and impartial – Assess whether AI systems include 
internal and external checks to help enable equitable 
application across all participants.
•	 Transparent and explainable – Help participants 
understand how their data can be used and how AI systems 
make decisions. Algorithms, attributes, and correlations are 
open to inspection. 
•	 Responsible and accountable – Put an organizational 
structure and policies in place that can help clearly determine 
who is responsible for the output of AI system decisions.
•	 Robust and reliable – Confirm that AI systems have the 
ability to learn from humans and other systems in order to 
produce consistent and reliable outcomes. 
•	 Privacy – Respect data privacy and avoid using AI to 
leverage customer data beyond its intended and stated use. 
Allow customers to opt in or opt out of sharing their data.
•	 Safe and secure – Protect AI systems from potential risks 
(including cyber risks) that may cause physical and digital harm. 
Points to Ponder 
•	 Does the organization have an integrated AI governance program?
•	 How are ethical considerations factored into AI implementation? Should there be a chief ethics officer to govern ongoing 
monitoring of AI?
•	 Does the organization have a chief risk officer, data officer, or equivalent risk leader to help with risks associated with 
enterprise-wide AI initiatives?
•	 Does the board have a member who is a technology or AI expert?
•	 What board-level approvals or consultations happen around AI implementation and changes post-implementation?


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    11
STRATEGY & OBJECTIVE-SETTING 
Every organization has a strategy for bringing its mission and 
vision to fruition, and to drive value. Organizations should 
integrate ERM with strategy setting to gain insight into 
the risk profile associated with the organization’s strategy 
and business objectives. The Strategy & Objective Setting 
component and following principles of the COSO ERM 
Framework serve as the basis for this section of the paper: 
6 	Analyzes business context
7 	Defines risk appetite
8 	Evaluates alternative strategies
9 	Formulates business objectives
Organizations should establish a strategy and business 
objectives in relation to AI. According to Deloitte’s 2020 
Chief Strategy Officer Survey, 51% of respondents indicated 
AI was important for their organization’s strategy, but 17% 
felt that their organization had capabilities to execute AI-
related strategies.12  With an understanding of business and 
strategic context, an organization’s leaders can understand 
internal and external factors that impact risks for their 
AI initiatives. Important components are classification 
of current or potential uses of AI and related data, and 
evaluation of potential exposure to AI use. 
Use of AI models that do not align with an organization’s 
values can hurt strategic objectives. There are numerous 
examples where organizations have used AI models that 
produced outputs that resulted in different or unequal 
treatment of participants based on protected characteristics 
(e.g., gender, race, etc.). These incidents suggest an 
inadequate focus on identifying and addressing issues 
related to fairness and transparency during both AI 
development and ongoing monitoring.
Defining risk appetite enables organizations to align risk 
identification, assessment, and response to business 
strategy. For a more in-depth discussion on defining risk 
appetite, refer to COSO’s “Risk Appetite – Critical to Success: 
Using Risk Appetite to Thrive in a Changing World”.13  An 
additional consideration in developing risk appetite is 
benchmarking against industry peers. An organization’s 
risk appetite is also a key consideration in facilitating risk-
informed decision-making as it relates to AI. There’s no 
way to eliminate risk entirely, thus the organization must 
determine its risk appetite and assess how much risk is 
acceptable when identifying and evaluating investments in 
AI. There’s a risk/reward trade-off to consider. Organizations 
adopting AI are making significant investments in 
development and implementation and must align their AI 
risk management with broader risk management efforts. 
According to Deloitte’s latest State of AI in the Enterprise 
report, 43% of surveyed seasoned AI adopters are pursuing 
such alignment.14 
Achieving Outcomes with Lower Risk

AI can create significant efficiency and benefits for an 
organization. Organizations are using AI to monitor 
components of a variety of manufacturing processes. 
For example, a manufacturer may use AI to predict when 
conveyor belts are likely to fail. Instead of using current 
fail-data for belts, the manufacturer may use AI via 
temperature measurements, video cam feeds, and other 
novel variables to identify fail points, thus creating new 
data to build a useful model. The training data and the 
data within the model itself may help drive efficiency for 
the manufacturer’s processes. This AI example illustrates 
a relatively common AI use case with reduced risk. 
. . . . . . . . .
12  Deloitte, 2020 Chief Strategy Officer Survey, a Monitor Deloitte and Kellogg School of Management study.
13  Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO), “Risk Appetite – Critical to Success: Using Risk Appetite to Thrive in a Changing World,” 
 May 2020. https://www.coso.org/Documents/COSO-Guidance-Risk-Appetite-Critical-to-Success.pdf. 
14  Ibid., Figure 2 on page 7.


c o s o . o r g
12    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
The interplay between developing strategy and risk appetite 
is a key input to an organization’s risk assessment. Informed 
by its risk assessment, an organization determines its 
responses to identified risks. An organization’s response 
should include setting up control activities (e.g., inventorying, 
benchmarking, and trends analysis) that manage the 
identified risks. Post-implementation, it’s important to 
measure outcomes to determine whether business objectives 
have been achieved with lower risk. Only about 34% of 
surveyed AI adopters are maintaining a formal inventory of all 
AI implementations.15  Without maintaining such an inventory, 
it’s difficult to monitor and evaluate potential exposure from 
AI use cases.
Drawing from a risk tolerance definition, which is one 
of the key parts of the COSO ERM Framework, helps to 
establish key performance and risk indicators around AI to 
monitor performance of algorithms over time. Setting up key 
performance and risk indicators and tolerance levels while 
the algorithm is being developed helps create a performance 
baseline by which to articulate trust. Reporting of such 
metrics brings transparency among stakeholders, which may 
help improve the performance of algorithm and integrity of 
the underlying input data.
Points to Ponder 
•	 Does the organization use strategic risk assessment 
techniques like scenario planning and assumptions 
testing for AI programs?
•	 Are AI capabilities used for identifying emerging risks 
and seeking stakeholder feedback about products, 
services, and brand?
•	 Do AI initiatives support risk analytics to monitor risks?
•	 Do AI risk assessments consider the risks and rewards 
associated with each AI use case and factor these 
trade-offs into both go/no-go decisions as well as 
design and purpose of relevant AI models?
. . . . . . . . .
15  Ibid., based on average from Figure 9 on page 15.


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    13
Identifying, assessing, and responding to risk are key 
activities that organizations should undertake to support 
the achievement of the organization’s strategy and business 
objectives. Risk, especially AI-related risk, emanates from a 
variety of sources, and organizations need to adopt a range 
of responses across the organization and at all levels. The 
Performance component and following principles of the 
COSO ERM Framework serve as the basis for this section of 
the paper:
10	Identifies risk
11 	Assesses severity of risk
12 	Prioritizes risks
13 	Implements risk responses
14	Develops portfolio view
Organizations should not implement AI applications without 
addressing their trustworthiness. To unlock the full potential 
value, AI models should be built with trustworthy AI in mind 
and include performance considerations that help to make AI 
robust, reliable, safe, and secure while maintaining privacy.
Not all AI models have the same risk profile. Organizations 
will need to perform risk assessments to solidify each 
business case. The identification of risks related to AI 
initiatives is also necessary to evaluate exposure and identify 
opportunities for a higher adoption of AI for value creation. 
Organizations also need to prioritize risks by assessing AI 
models and determining the level of accuracy, reliability, 
and transparency required for the related use case(s). AI 
models that require a high level of accuracy, reliability, or 
transparency to achieve success likely have a higher risk 
profile. In addition, an AI model that is being used to provide 
a suggestion for a low-impact decision (e.g., which song 
to play next) will have a lower risk profile than an AI model 
that is being used to automate decisions previously made 
by humans (e.g., deciding on underwriting terms for an 
insurance policy).
Organizations should consider the severity and priority of 
the risk as well as the business context, business objectives, 
and performance targets of the AI model in selecting and 
deploying a risk response. Risk responses related to AI 
models generally fall within the following categories:
•	 Accept: No action is taken to change the severity of the 
risk. This response is appropriate when the risk to strategy 
and business objectives is already within risk appetite. 
Risk that is outside the organization’s risk appetite and 
that management seeks to accept will generally require 
approval from the board or other oversight bodies. 
•	 Avoid: Action is taken to remove the risk, which may mean 
not using the AI model, limiting the scope of use of the AI 
model, or modifying the functionality of the AI model to 
limit complexity. 
•	 Pursue: Action is taken that accepts increased risk 
to achieve improved performance. This may involve 
expanding the scope of use of AI models or modifying 
the functionality of the AI model to increase complexity. 
When choosing to pursue risk, management understands 
the nature and extent of any changes required to achieve 
desired performance while not exceeding the boundaries 
of acceptable risk tolerance. 
•	 Reduce: Action is taken to reduce the severity of the 
risk. This involves establishing business processes and 
controls that reduce residual risk to an acceptable level 
aligned with the organization’s risk profile and appetite. 
(Actions organizations may take to reduce risk associated 
with AI models are described below.) 
•	 Share: Action is taken to reduce the severity of the risk 
by transferring or otherwise sharing a portion of the 
risk. A common example is outsourcing development, 
implementation, or monitoring of AI models to specialist 
service providers.   
PERFORMANCE 


c o s o . o r g
14    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
Although it’s not possible to completely avoid AI risk, there 
are actions organizations can take to reduce risk. One is 
to develop a testing regime for developed or implemented 
AI solutions and apply the testing regime throughout the 
AI solutions’ lifecycle. Approximately 40% of surveyed AI 
adopters currently conduct internal audits and testing of 
their AI implementations.16
Artificial Intelligence Sometimes has Unintended 
Consequences 

The performance of algorithms must be comprehensively 
assessed for fairness, transparency, and robustness. They 
have the potential to drift from the original strategic 
intention as they ingest more data.
•	 Fair and impartial: Is there bias toward certain groups, 
justified differential treatment of groups, or a fair rep­
resentation of relevant populations?
•	 Transparent and explainable: What are the main con­
tributors that influence model output and how does 
each input factor influence the result?
•	 Robust and reliable: Will the model remain stable in the 
future and generalize well to unseen data or is there a 
risk of future bias as the model receives new data?
Key actions in assessing performance of AI models include 
but are not limited to:
•	 Risk review helps identify risk factors, including 
cybersecurity, data risks, bias, and ethics, that could 
prevent or sub-optimize the goals of successful AI 
implementation. A portfolio view of risks associated 
with all AI projects should be reviewed with senior 
management and the board of directors. A key aspect of 
this review is implementation of risk responses where 
each response and the residual level of risk should be 
carefully evaluated against the risk appetite definition. 
•	 Data review helps evaluate quality and integrity of data 
and its impact on AI models and their outcomes. Data 
review also helps identify correlations between variables. 
For example, does age and/or body mass index correlate 
to getting cancer? Organizations can perform multivariate 
analysis of underlying data to identify historical sources of 
bias that may be used as input to the algorithms.
•	 Model review tests outcomes using the following actions:
1.	Analysis of the algorithm’s functional form and 
parameters to understand possible problems in the 
decision-making process.
2.	Assessment of algorithm performance on real data 
to test for hidden biases resulting from complex 
correlations or other unexpected sources of real-world 
error. Correlation is important because it helps identify 
the presence of an association between a protected 
variable (e.g., gender, race, etc.) and variables that may 
serve as potential proxies for a protected variable used 
in the model. If such a relationship exists, the model may 
contain bias. Statistical significance indicates that the 
relationship between these variables is not caused by 
random chance.
•	 Implementation review helps ensure an AI algorithm is 
working correctly. This review helps assess whether the 
algorithm will continue to be robust, effective, and fair in 
the future, and identifies potential risks.
•	 Post-deployment review looks at algorithms on a 
repeated basis. It’s necessary to periodically assess 
model performance and fairness after deployment. This 
assessment likely requires a monitoring mechanism that 
continuously tests the underlying data and functionality of 
the model. 
Complications When AI models Perform Outside their 
Test Environment 

Testing the performance and outputs of an AI model 
includes considering unexpected data/behavior or 
changes within the data to evaluate the reliability of the 
outcomes from the AI model. Depending on how the 
AI model is designed, the introduction of unexpected 
data/behavior or changes in the data may result in the 
AI model producing incorrect/harmful outputs or not 
functioning at all. There can be significant consequences 
for organizations that implement AI models that are not 
robust and reliable. 
. . . . . . . . .
16  Ibid., based on average from Figure 9 on page 15.


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    15
Keep in mind that AI programs can be hacked like any 
other data source or company. Deloitte found that 62% of 
respondents have significant concerns about cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities but only 39% are addressing these risks.17 To 
keep AI applications and related data safe and secure — a 
trustworthy AI pillar — organizations must implement and 
maintain a model-version control methodology, including 
maintaining a baseline version of the AI model and tracking 
each subsequent version and the changes made to it to 
enable auditability, transparency, and reproducibility of the 
AI model. The data-version control methodology provides 
the foundation. Organizations should establish incremental 
preventative, detective, and monitoring controls around the 
model as well as data used to train the underlying algorithms 
within the model to prevent and detect unauthorized or 
malicious changes. Due to the computing power necessary 
to drive many of these models, the processing takes place in 
the cloud, which introduces third-party reliability and privacy 
concerns as well. 
Furthermore, policies are required that address securely 
retaining personal data (encryption, anonymization, etc.), 
data disposal and communicating what is obtained, how 
it is used, and how it is maintained. Deloitte found that 
57% of respondents have significant concerns about the 
consequences of using personal data without consent, but 
only 37% are addressing these risks.18 Privacy is an important 
pillar for achieving trustworthy AI.
Rules about when further review is necessary must be 
established. Organizations should define deficiencies, 
performance measures, and thresholds that require 
further investigation or escalated review. In addition to 
Performance, these rules support the Governance & Culture 
and Strategy & Objective Setting components of the COSO 
ERM Framework. Key inputs include but are not limited to the 
following items:
•	 The organization’s definition of success (not just financial 
or operational) for AI initiatives and related AI models
•	 Identified risks to achieving that success
•	 Controls designed and implemented to manage those risks
As part of responsibility and accountability, one of the pillars 
of trustworthy AI, organizations need to define and execute 
processes to monitor for continued success. They also 
should define and execute remediation when success is not 
achieved. People need to be specifically responsible for those 
activities. To help those responsible, the architecture needed 
to support monitoring, and escalation can be built into the AI 
platform. Automation can help facilitate the monitoring and 
escalate reviews to designated people in real time.
Points to Ponder 
•	 Do AI model performance reviews include assessing 
and managing risks to improve results?
•	 Are key risk and performance indicators for AI applica­
tions monitored through executive dashboards and 
reported to authorized data users?
•	 How much confidence is there that the AI application 
and related controls are operating as intended and 
generating the right information for decision-making?
. . . . . . . . .
17  Ibid., Figure 8, page 14.
18  Ibid., Figure 8, page 14.


c o s o . o r g
16    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
. . . . . . . . .
18	2013 COSO Internal Control – Integrated Framework


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    17
REVIEW & REVISION 
In an ever-changing business environment, an organization’s 
strategy or business objectives and ERM practices and 
capabilities may change over time. Specific to the realm of 
AI, the ongoing changes in capabilities and expansion of 
uses require an organization to continually assess its ERM 
practices and capabilities, and revise them if necessary. The 
Review & Revision component and following principles of the 
COSO ERM Framework serve as the basis for this section of 
the paper:
15	Assesses substantial change
16	Reviews risk and performance
17 	Pursues improvement in ERM
As mentioned previously in this paper, organizations are 
increasingly adopting AI and are anticipating organizational 
and industry-wide transformation from their investments in 
AI. In addition, regulatory agencies and governments have 
enacted and are deliberating over additional regulations 
pertaining to the use of AI and related data. These 
developments may lead to substantial changes, including 
functionality of AI models, which may result in new or 
changed risks. Such development may also affect ERM as 
well as the achievement of strategy and business objectives. 
An iterative process that can affect several components 
of ERM involves identifying substantial changes and their 
effects, and responding to those changes. 
Reviewing ERM practices and capabilities along with the 
organization’s performance relative to its targets helps 
enable organizations to monitor how their AI applications 
increase value and will continue to drive it. Management 
needs to test and monitor AI and machine learning 
applications to help ensure the applications work as they’re 
intended. Ongoing monitoring of performance and risks 
helps assess if AI is delivering on its intended objectives and 
establishes a cycle of risk-informed decision-making.
A risk taxonomy focused on the AI model and related 
initiative should be developed to address the universe of 
AI risks. Risk management teams must help develop the 
taxonomy that will guide risk identification and assessment 
efforts. Organizations can use the COSO ERM Framework and 
other guidance to help identify, assess, prioritize, and monitor 
AI-related risks. Assessing the AI model’s achievement of 
objectives demonstrates the value of risk management and 
highlights opportunities for improvement.
Key performance and risk indicators are important to 
maintain for the long term because algorithms change as 
they learn and may produce unintended consequences in the 
future. Furthermore, even the best-intentioned algorithms are 
subject to bias or issues related to reliability. Simply omitting 
personally identifiable information (PII), such as race and 
gender, may not be sufficient. Continual monitoring and 
testing of algorithms is necessary especially as data used by 
algorithms and trends within the data change over time.
The three lines of defense model can be used whereby 
each stakeholder can play a role in review and revision 
of AI applications and their performance. The first line, 
guided by ERM, can proactively identify and address risk 
factors for AI, while ERM (the second line) can collaborate 
with the first line and make risk assessments effective, 
dynamic, and actionable. ERM can also collaborate with the 
first line stakeholders to present insightful risk reports and 
recommendations to the leadership. Internal audit, using risk-
based approach, can play an independent reviewer role and 
critically assess AI applications for business performance 
and risk management goals.


c o s o . o r g
18    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
Serious Issues Can Arise When Performance Isn’t 
Reviewed and Monitored

For example, AI models are increasingly being used 
within healthcare to assist in diagnosing conditions and 
providing medical advice. If organizations or medical 
professionals do not properly monitor the performance 
of these models, they may not identify and correct 
cases where the AI models provide inaccurate diagno­
sis or medical advice. Failure to identify and correct 
inaccurate results may lead to medical harm, patient 
concerns, and questions about the process for building 
the related AI models. 
Points to Ponder 
•	 Does the organization perform a portfolio review of all 
AI programs to understand synergies and risks at an 
aggregate level?
•	 Does a chief risk officer participate in AI performance 
reviews to share risk management perspectives?
•	 Are findings, both positive and negative, shared with 
the members of senior management and board of 
directors in such reviews?
•	 Does senior management take appropriate remedial 
actions to address any negative findings?
•	 Do you have a multidisciplinary risk management team 
that can help with AI model risk mitigation planning?


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    19
Organizations are continually challenged to use the enormous 
quantity of data generated coupled with the increasing 
concerns over privacy and security of data and transparency 
of related AI models. In this environment, it is important that 
organizations provide the right information, in the right form, at 
the right level of detail, to the right people, in a timely manner. 
The Information, Communication & Reporting component and 
following principles of the COSO ERM Framework serve as the 
basis for this section of the paper:
18	Leverages information and technology
19	Communicates risk information
20	Reports on risk, culture, and performance
Reports on risk, culture, and performance use IT systems 
to capture, process, and manage data and information. 
Management uses that information to inform and support 
risk management, including risk management related to AI 
models. A reporting process is needed to inform internal 
and external stakeholders about the performance, benefits, 
and potential risks of AI models. The reporting process 
also considers how, when, and how often stakeholders 
will receive the information. In building an organization’s 
resilience, an understanding of the risk landscape is needed, 
and a unified AI risk report should be compiled for executive 
management and board members to aid their oversight 
efforts. This report may include updates regarding key 
performance measures and risk indicators for performance 
of the organization’s AI models, as well as results from key 
oversight and monitoring processes. Timely communication 
of results, including unexpected findings, is vital for 
identification and resolution of issues before they grow into 
larger problems. 
To prevent crises, manage issues, and prepare for 
worst-case scenarios that may emerge from undesired 
performance or incidents related to AI initiatives, a crisis 
communications response framework and protocols should 
act as a guide. (See Figure 7) Such a crisis communications 
playbook will spell out how an organization should respond 
to control the impact and exposure from any incidents while 
keeping the business running. It should also include steps to 
assist recovery.
Data around stakeholder reactions is an important 
component of rebuilding and emerging stronger following 
a crisis. These responses will help inform AI strategy and 
implementation and assist the organization in meeting 
expectations for transparency.
INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION, & REPORTING
Figure 7. Building Resilience
Copyright © 2020 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
Understand the 
full implications 
of your risk 
landscape  
Prevent crises,
manage issues, 
and prepare for 
the worst   
Respond to, and
recover from, crises 
and keep your  
business running   
Learn, rebuild, 
and emerge 
stronger
Risks
Issues
Crisis
New
normal
Current
state
Future
state
Identify
Assess
Prevent
Prepare
Respond
Recover
Learn
Emerge
stronger
Manage
Business as usual


c o s o . o r g
20    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
Points to Ponder 
•	 Is there a crisis response plan in place?
•	 What AI program performance reporting is 
disseminated to stakeholders and to the public?
•	 Do executives and oversight bodies within the 
organization receive relevant performance information 
around AI programs?
AI Use in the Spotlight

AI is increasingly becoming a large part of organization’s 
business operations. In recognition of investors’ increas­
ing interest in AI use, several large technology-based 
companies have included disclosures in their 10-K filings 
that outline how AI models currently impact business 
operations and their potential impact in the future. 


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    21
SUMMARY REMARKS  
To realize AI’s value and take advantage of its potential, organizations must align risk management with their strategy and 
execution of their AI initiatives. The COSO ERM Framework can help organizations develop integrated governance over 
AI, manage risks, and drive performance to achieve strategic goals. By implementing integrated governance over AI, 
organizations can have better information about relevant risks. This may support an increase in the range of opportunities 
and flexibility to take calculated strategic risks and become nimbler and more adaptive in planning and executing their AI 
initiatives. Although not authoritative, the Deloitte Trustworthy AITM Framework can help organizations think through the risks 
when implementing COSO’s ERM Framework for AI. 
Through ERM, informed by the COSO ERM Framework, organizations can reduce performance variability and improve the 
likelihood of success for their AI initiatives. By identifying signals to correct course early, organizations can increase positive 
outcomes, reduce negative surprises, and improve resilience to risk. Risk-informed resource allocation can also be improved 
and, by understanding its risk, the organization may be better equipped to deliver return on investment and meet stakeholder 
expectations. Furthermore, by implementing ERM, organizations can refine and adapt their innovation initiatives to support their 
strategies in a rapidly changing business environment. 
Properly implemented risk management can help organizations take advantage of calculated risks with high rewards, manage 
inherent risks and help significantly decrease self-inflicted risks. (See Figure 9).
MISSION, VISION 
& CORE VALUES
STRATEGY
DEVELOPMENT
BUSINESS
OBJECTIVE
FORMULATION
IMPLEMENTATION
& PERFORMANCE
ENHANCED 
VALUE
Review 
& Revision
Information, 
Communication, 
& Reporting
Performance
Strategy & 
Objective-Setting
Governance 
& Culture
Figure 8. COSO Enterprise Risk Management – Integrating with Strategy and Performance Framework  
Copyright © 2020 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
Expected reward for risk
(value to an organization
for taking on risks)
Controllability
(ability of organization to reduce the 
uncertainties creating risks)
Less
More
Rewarded 
Risks
Unrewarded 
Risks
Imposed 
risks
Risks originating from 
uncontrollable and 
unavoidable external factors
(e.g., catastrophes 
regulatory changes) 
Calculated risks
Risks resulting from 
organization's strategic and 
operational choices 
intended to generate value
(e.g., new markets and  
products adoption of 
new technology) 
Self-inflicted
risks 
Risks resulting from day-to-day
operations, decisions,  
and behaviors of
constituencies 
(e.g., poor judgment,
gaps in compliance)  
Figure 9. An ERM Program Helps Organizations Achieve Success Related to Their AI Initiatives 


c o s o . o r g
22    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
AI solutions need to be trusted, tried, and true. Trusted – because ERM is transparent by nature and it helps keep an 
organization abreast of its risks and opportunities. Tried – in that models are continually tested and vetted to verify they are 
operating as intended. And True – governance, risk management, testing, and monitoring regimes help models to operate 
in ways that reflect the organization’s values and protect its reputation. The COSO ERM Framework, when considered 
appropriately, can result in trusted, tried, and true AI.
1.	 Establish governance structure for AI program. 
Determine when and how the organization will 
use AI and define the purpose and objectives of 
proposed AI initiatives. This includes evaluating 
applicable ethical considerations. Bring various 
AI initiatives across your organization under an 
overall AI program and a governance structure 
providing visibility to senior management and 
board of directors. Identify a senior executive 
to lead your AI program and provide risk and 
performance oversight. 
2.	Get an AI risk strategy together. Collaborate 
with stakeholders to draft an organization-wide 
strategy to manage the strategic, technical, 
regulatory, and operational risks of AI. Ensure that 
your organization has the AI technical experience 
to execute the AI risk strategy. The strategy 
should define roles, responsibilities, controls, and 
mitigation procedures. 
3.	Take the initiative with AI risk assessment. For 
each AI model your organization uses, gauge 
the potential impact of suboptimal strategic 
outcomes, operational failures, or bias. Also, 
evaluate how the algorithm manages and uses 
data and whether it introduces any unintended 
bias. For business processes that integrate with 
AI, look for vulnerabilities and see how likely 
they are to occur, then record known risks and 
corresponding controls. 
4.	Develop a portfolio view of risks and 
opportunities for AI initiatives. Chief Risk Officer 
and AI leader can work together to proactively 
review AI models for risks pertaining to bias, 
tampering, and model malfunction. They should 
report a portfolio view of AI risks to senior 
executives and board of directors for awareness 
and decision-making support. 
5.	Lay out an approach to manage AI risks and 
report to stakeholders for transparency. This 
includes evaluating risk-reward trade-offs for 
AI initiatives and resource allocation. Consider 
assembling a team of AI model risk experts 
to offer leading practices, objectivity, and 
risk response methodologies. Establish key 
performance and risk metrics to measure goals 
such as efficacy, fairness, and transparency of 
each model. For each metric, set thresholds 
that would trigger off-cycle model reviews and 
corrective actions. Develop reporting dashboards 
for executives and boards of directors, as well as 
disclose AI performance and risk management 
actions to external stakeholders for awareness. 
Call to action: Five next steps to consider based on the COSO ERM Framework
Use the COSO framework and underlying components and principles to establish a trustworthy AI program. 
Here’s how to get started:


c o s o . o r g
 Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence   |    23
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Keri Calagna, Risk & Financial Advisory Principle, Deloitte & Touche LLP
Keri is a leader in Deloitte’s Cyber and Strategic Risk practice. With more than 25 years of 
risk experience, Keri helps organizations evolve their culture, capabilities, and processes 
to create integrated risk programs that help grow the business, accelerate performance, 
improve resilience, and achieve strategic goals. Throughout her career, she has helped 
businesses evaluate, manage, and monitor a wide spectrum of risks including financial, 
operational, reputational, regulatory, enterprise, strategic, and technological risk. Keri 
commonly advises boards and executive leadership teams on the design and roll-out of 
enterprise-level risk governance, monitoring, and reporting and helps executives align and 
mobilize around the top-most risks to their organization.
Keri received a BS and MBA in Entrepreneurship from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute’s 
Lally School of Management & Technology. 
Brian Cassidy, Audit & Assurance Partner, Deloitte & Touche LLP
Brian is the US Audit & Assurance Artificial Intelligence/Algorithms leader with diverse 
experience providing audit and advisory services to Fortune 500 companies. A leader 
who brings strong technical, risk management, communication, and organizational skills, 
he focuses on providing audit, accounting, and advisory services to public and private 
companies in the financial services sector. Brian’s experience crosses a wide range of 
industries in the financial services sector, including banking (brokers/dealers), investment 
companies, business development companies, and alternative funds, including private 
equity, hedge, and real estate. He also leads Deloitte’s efforts in the Algo/AI assurance area 
as emerging technologies continue to impact clients and the marketplace.
Brian is a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), The 
Pennsylvania Institute of Certified Public Accountants (PICPA), and The New York State 
Society of CPAs (NYSSCPA). Brian received a BS in Accountancy and BS in Business 
Administration from Villanova University.
Amy Park, Audit & Assurance Partner, Deloitte & Touche LLP
Amy is the Ideation leader for Deloitte’s Accounting Advisory & Transformation Services 
practice. In this role, Amy leads the development of ideas into potential new service 
offerings that can enhance the value Deloitte can bring to the marketplace, including areas 
of emerging technologies and expanded assurance, such as AI, algorithms, blockchain and 
digital assets. She is also a partner in Deloitte’s National Office Accounting and Reporting 
Services and specializes in technical accounting matters in consolidation, financial 
instruments, and accounting for digital asset transactions.
Amy is a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and serves on 
the AICPA’s Digital Assets Task Force, focusing on accounting matters related to digital 
assets. She has more than 17 years of experience in public accounting, including a practice 
fellowship at the Financial Accounting Standards Board, and has served public and private 
companies in the banking and securities and digital assets industries.


c o s o . o r g
24    |   Enterprise Risk Management   |  Realize the Full Potential of Artificial Intelligence
ABOUT COSO
ABOUT DELOITTE
This publication contains general information only and none of COSO, any of its constituent organizations or any of the authors 
of this publication is, by means of this publication, rendering accounting, business, financial, investment, legal, tax or other 
professional advice or services. Information contained herein is not a substitute for such professional advice or services, 
nor should it be used as a basis for any decision or action that may affect your business. Views, opinions or interpretations 
expressed herein may differ from those of relevant regulators, self-regulatory organizations or other authorities and may reflect 
laws, regulations or practices that are subject to change over time. Evaluation of the information contained herein is the sole 
responsibility of the user. Before making any decision or taking any action that may affect your business with respect to the 
matters described herein, you should consult with relevant qualified professional advisors. COSO, its constituent organizations 
and the authors expressly disclaim any liability for any error, omission or inaccuracy contained herein or any loss sustained by 
any person who relies on this publication.
Originally formed in 1985, COSO is a joint initiative of five private sector organizations and is dedicated to helping organizations 
improve performance by developing thought leadership that enhances internal control, risk management, governance, and fraud 
deterrence. COSO’s supporting organizations are the American Accounting Association (AAA), the American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), Financial Executives International (FEI), the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA),
and The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA).
This publication contains general information only and Deloitte is not, by means of this publication, rendering accounting, 
business, financial, investment, legal, tax, or other professional advice or services. This publication is not a substitute for such 
professional advice or services, nor should it be used as a basis for any decision or action that may affect your business. 
Before making any decision or taking any action that may affect your business, you should consult a qualified professional 
advisor. 
Deloitte shall not be responsible for any loss sustained by any person who relies on this publication.
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee (DTTL), its 
network of member firms, and their related entities. DTTL and each of its member firms are legally separate and independent 
entities. DTTL (also referred to as “Deloitte Global”) does not provide services to clients. In the United States, Deloitte refers 
to one or more of the US member firms of DTTL, their related entities that operate using the “Deloitte” name in the United 
States, and their respective affiliates. Certain services may not be available to attest clients under the rules and regulations of 
public accounting. Please see Deloitte.com/about to learn more about our global network of member firms.


Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
of the Treadway Commission
c o s o . o r g
E n t e r p r i s e  R i s k  M a n a g e m e n t


c o s o . o r g
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
APPLYING THE COSO FRAMEWORK AND PRINCIPLES 
TO HELP IMPLEMENT AND SCALE AI 
E n t e r p r i s e  R i s k  M a n a g e m e n t
REALIZE THE 
FULL POTENTIAL 
OF ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE
